<h3>I</h3>

<p class="nind">CERTAIN fragments of scene and speech come back to me with a peculiar
insistence, as I write this third portion of my book. I have no
hesitation in setting them down as I do, I think accurately enough, if
not word for word. I remember them well because they had impressed me.
That is the secret of memory. I have forgotten much, but there are
scenes I cannot forget, fragments of speech that still ring in my ear,
and I shall remember them always; at least, till I have finally pinned
them to paper.</p>

<p>The Admiral and I, and a few others—interesting types, I can assure
you—travelled to Siberia, where we engaged in a series of comic opera
attempts to wipe out the Russian revolution. By now, “Intervention” has
been relegated to the shelf of history. But I cannot but remember it,
not merely as an adventure in futility, as admittedly it was, but as an
ever-shifting, changing sense of being alive. For the experience of
love is inseparable from its background. Alone it does not exist. It is
a modulation of impressions, an interplay of “atmospheres,” a quickening
of the fibres of that background into throbbing tissues of an elusive,
half-apprehended beauty.</p>

<p>It was raining heavily when we arrived in Vladivostok, and the port, as
we surveyed it from the boat, looked grey and hopeless, like the Russian
situation. A flat had been allotted us, a bare, unfurnished flat in a
deserted house standing in a grim and desolate by-street; and there the
Admiral made his temporary headquarters. It poured all day long, and it
seemed, indeed, as though the rain, playing havoc with the town, would
never cease, even as the misery and blundering in Russia would never
cease, and that our efforts were not wanted and could do no good.</p>

<p>That night I entertained General Bologoevski at dinner at the famous
restaurant ‘Zolotoy Rog’—nicknamed by British sailors the ‘Solitary
Dog.’ He had travelled with us all the way from England, seemingly under
vague instructions from some Allied War Office, and had attached himself
to our party of his own accord. As we sat down, the head waiter came up
to us and respectfully informed the General that by order of the
Commander-in-Chief Russian officers were not admitted into restaurants.
The General protested feebly, stressing his hunger as a reason for
remaining, whereon the head waiter suggested, in an undertone, that the
obvious alternative was to remove the epaulets.</p>


<p>“What! Remove my epaulets! I, a Russian officer? Never!” he protested.</p>

<p>Whereon a brain-wave struck him. “I know,” said he, looking round the
restaurant. It was nearly empty. And instantly he compromised by putting
on his mackintosh. “Now,” said he, “in my English Burberry they will
take me for an English officer. Ah!” he smiled, and then added his
invariable English phrase: “It is a damrotten game, you know.” And,
after a momentary contemplation: “I give dem h-h-hell!”</p>

<p>I ordered chicken soup. The General talked loosely about the Siberian
situation. About five minutes after I had ordered soup the waiter
returned without being called and very amiably volunteered the
information that the soup would be served immediately. When,
three-quarters of an hour later, I asked the waiter about the soup, he
repeated “Immediately,” but the word now somehow failed to inspire in us
the same confidence. The General talked of the Siberian situation for
about an hour and a quarter, when we observed that the soup had not been
served. I again called the waiter.</p>

<p>“What about that soup?” I asked.</p>

<p>“I am afraid, sir,” said the waiter, “you will have to wait a while, for
soup is a troublesome thing to prepare nowadays.”</p>

<p>“How long?”</p>

<p>“About three-quarters of an hour.”</p>

<p>General Bologoevski then continued about the situation. I gathered that
there was a General Horvat who had formed an All-Russia Government, and
that there was also a Siberian Government, defying General Horvat on the
one hand and the Bolsheviks on the other, and that there were various
officer organizations grouped about this or the other government, and
some rather inclined to be on their own, all looking forward to a
possible intervention by the Allies. After an hour or so had elapsed I
interrupted General Bologoevski by observing that the soup had not yet
been served, and I called a waiter who was passing and told him to fetch
the waiter who had been serving us.</p>

<p>“He has gone to bed,” came the answer, “and I am on the night shift.”</p>

<p>“Oh!” And I inquired about the soup.</p>

<p>“Soup?” said the new waiter, evidently disowning all responsibility for
his predecessor, and after some hesitation he promised us some soup in
about three-quarters of an hour. General Bologoevski then continued
about the situation. He spoke for an intolerably long time, stopping
only once or twice to inquire about the soup and whether it was coming.
The clock in the corner chimed midnight, and then one. I was now
devilishly hungry, and the General looked misused and maltreated. I
shouted for the waiter, who with eyes closed slumbered in a standing
posture in the distant corner of the room. “What about that soup?” I
repeated in excited tones when the waiter showed signs of recovering
consciousness.</p>
<p>“Soup?” he asked. “Well, you see you can’t have soup nowadays ...
unless you choose to wait——”</p>

<p>“<i>Wait!</i>” I said.</p>

<p>“Three-quarters of an hour or so,” he said.</p>

<p>Whereupon the General rose. He rose in a threatening manner. It seemed
to me that the General’s manner of rising was deliberately
remonstrative, a protest undisguised.</p>

<p>“General!” I shouted, as he ran across to his hat and sword. “Come back
and have something. A chicken cutlet. General!”</p>

<p>But he was gone. I sat alone at my table and waited for the cutlet. As I
looked before me I observed sitting at a distant table a man with a
familiar face. I could not believe it. My heart leapt within me. I
dashed from my chair.</p>

<p>“Nikolai Vasilievich!”</p>

<p>“Andrei Andreiech!”</p>

<p>“Is it possible? Is it really you?”</p>

<p>Nikolai Vasilievich was kissing me on both cheeks, in confirmation of
his identity.</p>

<p>“Well, I never thought that you were here! I never thought that you
could be here, Nikolai Vasilievich.”</p>

<p>“I am here,” said Nikolai Vasilievich sadly.</p>

<p>“And who else is here, who else, Nikolai Vasilievich?”</p>

<p>“All,” sighed Nikolai Vasilievich.</p>

<p>“All! How do you mean all?”</p>

<p>“<i>All.</i>”</p>

<p>“Fanny Ivanovna here?”</p>


<p>“Yes, she is here.”</p>

<p>“Nina?”</p>

<p>“Yes, she is here.”</p>

<p>“And Pàvel Pàvlovich?”</p>

<p>“Yes, both Pàvel Pàvlovichi are here.”</p>

<p>“And Eberheim?”</p>

<p>“Yes, he is here too ... they’re all here.”</p>

<p>“You don’t say so!... And Čečedek?”</p>

<p>“All here—all.”</p>

<p>“And Vera?”</p>

<p>“Yes.”</p>

<p>“And Sonia?...”</p>

<p>“Yes, all—my wife and all.”</p>

<p>“Which wife, Nikolai Vasilievich?”</p>

<p>“How do you mean? I only have one—Magda Nikolaevna.”</p>

<p>“Oh, you haven’t married Zina then?”</p>

<p>“No, but she is here. They are all here—all her family ... Uncle Kostia
... all.”</p>

<p>“How are they all? Tell me, Nikolai Vasilievich ... the grandfathers
dead, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“Oh no, both here. But I don’t think—nobody thinks—they can last very
long now, either of them.”</p>

<p>“Oh, they’re alive. That’s good.... And so Magda Nikolaevna is here
too—with Čečedek, of course.”</p>

<p>“Yes, and Eisenstein.”</p>

<p>“She has married Čečedek?”</p>

<p>“No, she has married no one—except me, of course. But I expect it won’t
be very long now till I get a divorce.”</p>


<p>My voice dropped to a confidential whisper. “Why are they all here,
Nikolai Vasilievich?” I asked.</p>

<p>“Andrei Andreiech, don’t ask me. Why is it that they followed me here
all the way from Petrograd? And when I had to go over to Japan just for
a fortnight on a matter of business ... well, they all followed me there
... all ... every one of them!... You see, they are, so to speak,
economically dependent on me. That is why I suppose they follow me about
wherever I go. We are inseparable—financially. We are a chain. Russia
being what she is to-day—disjointed, with neither railway nor postal
communication that you can rely on, they simply have to be where I am if
they are to get money out of me. I quite understand their position. So
they follow me, you see....”</p>

<p>“Nikolai Vasilievich!” And I shook him long and warmly by the hand.</p>

<p>We sat together long into the morning, and Nikolai Vasilievich
complained of his lot. The mines, it seemed, were still the chief
deterrent to his happiness. His family, he said, had decided to leave
Petrograd and go east because their house, which, strictly speaking,
belonged to them no longer, had, since the Bolshevik revolution, been
invaded by a host of undesirable people and there was hardly a room left
in the house that they could call their own. Another reason which
prompted them to leave the capital was that the Bolshevik authorities
had restricted individuals from drawing on their current accounts in the
banks; and what was more important still, Nikolai Vasilievich had
really nothing left in the bank to draw upon. So he had naturally turned
to his other source of income—the gold-mines in Siberia. He had poured
considerable money into these gold-mines in the past, in the hope that
some day they would make him very wealthy. For years and years they had
a way of ever being on the eve of making him wealthy, yet always some
minor, unforeseen incident occurred which temporarily postponed the
realization of his hopes. The gold-mines were about to begin to pay,
when war broke out and temporarily affected the output. Then in the war
he perceived the opportunity of placing them on a military footing. The
governor, a friend of his, had promised to assist him, when unhappily
the revolution came and the governor was arrested and dismissed.
Kerenski’s time was the most trying time of all. For then the miners
began to call committee-meetings and talk as to what they would do when
they seized the mines; but they confined their revolutionary schemes to
a violent expression as to what they <i>would</i> do, in the meantime doing
nothing, either in the taking over of the mines or in the working of
them. With the Bolshevik revolution things began to move, and the men
seized the mines. At first the news was a great shock to Nikolai
Vasilievich, for he knew that there were many families dependent on him.
Then he perceived that he could actually buy the gold from the men at
exactly the same price as it had cost him to produce it. He was much
relieved, and for the first time in his life he was actually doing good
business.</p>

<p>It was then that they decided to leave Petrograd for Siberia, and his
families, dependents and hangers-on naturally all followed him. He
travelled with Fanny Ivanovna, Sonia, Nina, Baron Wunderhausen, Kniaz,
Eberheim and the book-keeper Stanitski. His wife was in the same train,
but in a different carriage, and she insisted on having Vera with her,
for she was not well, and Čečedek was merely a man. Eisenstein followed
her. At times it seemed as if he had lost sight of them; but he
invariably turned up by the next train in every town they halted.
Eberheim was a great trouble. He suffered terribly. At several wayside
stations they had to take him out and put him into hospital. Sometimes
there was no hospital, only a doctor. Sometimes there was no doctor, and
Zina’s father attended to him as best he could. Eisenstein too was
helpful. On more than one occasion Zina’s family—the largest family of
all—and Magda Nikolaevna’s party, had gone on not knowing that Nikolai
Vasilievich’s party had remained behind; and Nikolai Vasilievich thought
that he would never see them again. But they had discovered his absence
and waited for him in the next town along the line, before proceeding
farther. The two old grandfathers stood the journey very well on the
whole, considering their advanced age and the hardships of the trip.
What made it very unpleasant for Nikolai Vasilievich was that the
various parties who were financially dependent on him were not on
speaking terms with one another. He was besieged with notes requesting
private interviews, and there were violent disputes which he was called
upon to settle. When at length he had arrived at the headquarters of his
gold-mines, he learnt that the Czecho-Slovak troops in their recent
offensive against the Bolsheviks had recaptured the mines, shot the
miners’ leaders, imprisoned many other miners, and then handed the mines
back to his manager; whereon the miners killed the manager and refused
to resume work. Mr. Thomson, his consulting-engineer, despairing of the
situation, had returned to England. And Nikolai Vasilievich perceived
that his recent scheme of purchasing the gold from the men had been
completely knocked on the head.</p>

<p>He was now considering another scheme that had been suggested to him by
a number of financiers in the Far East, which involved the active
co-operation of two influential generals—to organize and dispatch a
punitive expedition to the gold-mines in order to compel the miners to
restart work. This somewhat complicated scheme had necessitated a trip
to Tokio to interest another Russian general who was there in the
scheme; and all the families, no doubt thinking that he was trying to
escape from his responsibilities, followed him to Tokio, thus
unnecessarily increasing his expenses. He had had great difficulty in
finding accommodation for his family in Vladivostok; but for Fanny
Ivanovna, Sonia, Nina, Vera, Baron Wunderhausen and himself he had
procured the ground floor of a little house. All the others had also
settled down in Vladivostok. And the Baron would, no doubt, find it
difficult to evade military service.</p>

<p>“And how are you?” asked Nikolai Vasilievich. “I wondered if you would
be coming with the Admiral. We half expected that you would. Well, what
do you think of it?”</p>

<p>“Think of it!” I said. “Why, we are the men of the hour. You should have
seen the deputations, proclamations, speeches, hailing him as the new
Lafayette. He said to-day, jokingly of course, that he would have to
work out a time-table for seeing people. Dictators, say, from 7 to 10;
supreme rulers between 10 and 1; prime ministers could be admitted
between 2 and 5. Then till seven he would be free to cabinet ministers
of the rank and file. Supreme commanders-in-chief could come from 8 to
1. And so forth, down to common general officers commanding. Yes, it was
hardly an exaggeration....”</p>

<p>Nikolai Vasilievich smiled one of his kindly smiles. “Do you think it
will be all right?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Rather!” I replied irrelevantly. “It’s the climax of his career. He has
been called upon by four joint deputations representing, I think, four
separate All-Russia Governments whose heads conferred on him the title
of ‘Supreme Commander-in-Chief of All the Armed Military and Naval
Forces operating on the Territory of Russia,’ or something of this
sort. And he made a speech to them; said that Foch was wrong and Douglas
Haig was wrong, and all those muddle-headed politicians! The war was to
be won on the Eastern Front.”</p>

<p>“I too think it will be won on the Eastern Front,” said Nikolai
Vasilievich. “It ought to, anyhow.”</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>“Well, because the Eastern Front has unquestionably the greater
resources in mineral wealth. The gold-mines ought to be cleared of the
enemy before anything else if you want to win the war.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said I with an assumed and exaggerated pensiveness, “that is
unquestionably the case.”</p>

<p>We arranged to meet again to-morrow, as we descended arm in arm the
shabby flight of steps, and it was decided that Nikolai Vasilievich
should call for me and drive me home to see the family.</p>

<p>The rain had ceased. We parted at the cross-roads.</p>

<p>  </p>

<p>When I turned into my bedroom I beheld the Admiral and a little
dark-haired man, aquiline featured, sitting on my bed and talking like
two conspirators. The dark-haired little man then rose with the
precision common to Russian officers, and shook hands. He was, I learnt
afterwards, Admiral Kolchak.</p>

<p>It was very late that night when I fell asleep. I was thinking of my
meeting on the morrow with the family, with Nina. I pictured to myself
her image as I last remembered it. And, interlacing with these thoughts,
there was the thought of the gallant Admiral in the bedroom opposite,
tucked away between his heavy blankets, his teeth in a glass of water
on the table at his side—no presentable sight!—seeing visions of a
Napoleonic ride athwart the great Siberian plain, at the head of his
vast new armies marching onward to take their stand on the
re-established Eastern Front.</p>

<p>Then in the small hours of the morning he was wakened by the noise of a
dog that ran through the half-open door of his bedroom in pursuit of a
cat. I heard the Admiral strike a match, then jump out of bed and fumble
with his stick under the bed and cupboards and chest of drawers,
evidently looking for the animals. I went in to him and offered my
services in the chase.</p>

<p>“Can you see the dog?” came the Admiral’s sturdy voice from under a
cupboard.</p>

<p>“I’m looking for the cat, sir.”</p>

<p>“Cat! Where did <i>that</i> come from?”</p>

<p>“I saw it run into your room after a rat.”</p>

<p>“Nonsense!”</p>

<p>“I did, sir, and the dog ran in after the cat.”</p>

<p>We fumbled with our sticks.</p>

<p>“I don’t believe there was a rat,” said the Admiral.</p>

<p>“There was, sir. I saw it myself.”</p>

<p>“I don’t mind the dog so much. Cats I hate. But I can’t stick the rat.
Why did you tell me?”</p>

<p>I did not answer this.</p>

<p>“Can’t find them, sir,” I said, rising.</p>

<p>“They’ve gone, I hope,” said the Admiral.</p>

<p>“They’ve hidden themselves somewhere, I think.”</p>

<p>“Damn them! I shan’t be able to sleep all night.”</p>

<p>“Good night, sir,” said I.</p>


<p>The Admiral could not sleep. I heard him get out of bed and fumble with
his stick beneath the furniture. I think the uncertainty of the
whereabouts of the animals disturbed his peace of mind. Then I heard him
creep into bed, and all was still. I could just hear the rain drum
against the window-pane; and I thought that by now the cat had probably
eaten up the rat.</p>

<h3>II</h3>

<p>Nikolai Vasilievich was to call for me after lunch. At lunch there were
many guests, and the conversation was necessarily political. I was
impatient, for Nikolai Vasilievich might call at any moment; and the
entire scheme of “Intervention” seemed to me, in my mood of acute
expectancy, singularly unimportant. I watched the Admiral who in his
serious, deliberate way looked straight into his principal guest’s eyes
and listened very earnestly and nodded with approval, while the guest, a
Russian General, was talking arrant nonsense. In that stiff and martial
attitude common to a certain type of Russian officer (who assumes it as
it were in proof of grim determination) the guest was saying: “All these
complaints about arrests and executions by the loyal troops—I decline
to take them seriously. In the present wavering state of mind of the
population you can’t guarantee that there won’t be people who will
complain because the sun shines in the daytime only and not at night as
well.”</p>

<p>The Admiral gave an emphatic nod; and at a glance I could see that he
had classed his guest as a “good fellow.” The Admiral, I may explain,
divided the world into two big camps: the humanity that he called “good
fellows,” and the humanity that he called “rotters”—and there you are!
Simple. (As a matter of fact, he used a substitute for this last word,
but I am afraid the original is unprintable.) But while the guest was
being engaged by General Bologoevski, a quiet silver-haired British
Colonel took the opportunity of telling the Admiral in his quiet silvery
manner the conclusion he in his quiet silvery mind had quietly arrived
at after interviewing for many months innumerable Russian officers. “I
am afraid,” said he, “that whenever you come to examine very carefully a
Russian officer’s scheme for the restoration and salvation of his
country, it invariably boils down to giving him a job.”</p>

<p>And at a glance I could see that the Admiral had classed the fellow as a
“rotter.”</p>

<p>I forget the substance of the conversation of that lunch, which stands
out in my memory merely on account of its coincidence with the day on
which I met the family; but I remember how a remark of General
Bologoevski’s, that he understood the Bolshevik commissaries never
washed, lit up the Admiral’s face with ominous glee, and one could guess
at sight that he condemned the Bolshevik commissaries.</p>

<p>  </p>

<p>About two o’clock Nikolai Vasilievich called for me. We drove uphill,
the driver flogging his two horses with unwarranted zeal. The day was
bright, but the roads were muddy from the flood overnight. As we
arrived, another cab drove up at the porch, and from it emerged Fanny
Ivanovna and Kniaz. Kniaz made an insincere attempt to pay the cabfare;
but when Fanny Ivanovna said “It’s all right, I have some money,” Kniaz
said “Very well,” and replaced the empty purse in his pocket....</p>

<p>And for the next few minutes the three-roomed lodging of the little
house was the scene of a happy reunion.</p>

<p>Nina alone was absent from the household. Fanny Ivanovna was much
annoyed and tackled Sonia on the subject.</p>

<p>“How do I know where she is?” Sonia remonstrated. Then she smiled and I
felt that she knew all right; and then immediately she grew angry, and I
felt that after all, perhaps, she did not know.</p>

<p>“We have no means of knowing, Fanny Ivanovna,” said Baron Wunderhausen.</p>

<p>“Pàv’l Pàvlch,” she said, “please don’t annoy me. You annoy me with your
inconsequent talk, and I have asked you not to meddle ... and to wash
your neck.”</p>

<p>“He’s like Uncle Kostia!” Vera cried. “Has a bath once a year—whether
clean or dirty.” She was pretty, growing prettier.</p>

<p>Baron Wunderhausen only shrugged his shoulders.</p>

<p>Then the door opened and Nina slipped into the room. I was staggered by
her looks. To my mind she was irresistible. When she saw me she stopped
dead.</p>


<p>“Where have <i>you</i> come from?” she asked.</p>

<p>I explained confusedly, and a minute later she dismissed me and my
arrival as a thing entirely commonplace, and turned to the others.</p>

<p>“Nina,” said Fanny Ivanovna sternly, “where have you been? I insist on
your telling me.”</p>

<p>“And I won’t tell,” said Nina curtly.</p>

<p>“Nina,” I took it up, jokingly but with a sneaking sense of secretive
authority resting on our “engagement” of four years ago, “where have you
been? I too insist on your telling me.”</p>

<p>She looked at me with the expression that comes over people who are
about to put out their tongue at you, and said:</p>

<p>“And I won’t tell.”</p>

<p>“And how do you find us?” Fanny Ivanovna asked. “Have we grown older? I
think I have grown older. And Nikolai Vasilievich, too. And Kniaz.”</p>

<p>“No,” I lied. And assuredly the lie pleased her.</p>

<p>“And the children are just the same?”</p>

<p>“The children are just the same,” I agreed. “A bouquet. Three pretty
kittens.”</p>

<p>Vera purred like one.</p>

<p>“But you haven’t much room here, have you?” I observed.</p>

<p>“What can we do?” she asked. “The town is packed with refugees. We can’t
find anything better.”</p>

<p>“<i>À la guerre comme à la guerre</i>,” remarked the Baron.</p>


<p>“Still, it is more comfortable than living in an hotel. Sonia, Nina and
Vera sleep here on the sofa and the bed we drag out from the other room.
The adjoining room is Nikolai Vasilievich’s and mine. The third is Pàv’l
Pàvlch’s, the Baron’s. The others have remained at the hotel—I mean
Kniaz and Eberheim. I don’t care what Magda Nikolaevna does, but I think
she has now found a house. And Uncle Kostia and the rest of them will
probably settle at his sister’s, the Olenins. Kniaz comes here for his
meals and spends the day with us ... though lately”—she smiled—“he has
been going out hunting.”</p>

<p>“Hunting!” I exclaimed, looking at the Prince’s well-shaved chin.</p>

<p>Kniaz passed his fingers between his skinny neck and his stiff collar in
a nervous gesture and giggled feebly.</p>

<p>“He’s bought a gun,” said Nina.</p>

<p>“You should see the gun!” Vera cried.</p>

<p>Fanny Ivanovna smiled; and as we settled down to tea Nikolai Vasilievich
chaffed Kniaz in his timid, deferential manner. “I went out hunting with
him once. It’s a comedy! We see a hare. Kniaz pulls the trigger
once—misfire. Pulls at it again—misfire. Pulls at it a third time—and
the gun misfires for the third time. When he had pulled the trigger a
fourth time there was a terrible explosion; a blaze of fire burst forth
from the muzzle; the butt end hit him violently in the shoulder. And
when the smoke had gradually dispersed we saw that the hare had
evidently escaped undamaged. His instrument of murder was the only
victim; and there I saw Kniaz looking at his gun: the trigger and most
of the front piece had blown off in the concussion. But there he stood,
still holding the instrument in his hands, puzzled beyond words.”</p>

<p>Nikolai Vasilievich looked at Kniaz and smiled kindly, as though to make
up by it for any pain that his recital may have caused him.</p>

<p>Nina stretched a plate of sweets to me.</p>

<p>I looked at her interrogatively.</p>

<p>“With your tea,” she said.</p>

<p>“There is no sugar,” said Nikolai Vasilievich apologetically.</p>

<p>“I want to speak to you very seriously,” said Baron Wunderhausen, “about
transferring to the English Service.”</p>

<p>“Now that Andrei Andreiech has arrived,” said Fanny Ivanovna gaily, “we
shall be able to get sugar and everything from the English.”</p>

<p>“The English are all right,” said Nikolai Vasilievich. “I always did
have confidence in the English. If the English once begin a job you may
be sure they’ll see it through. And if the first step is taken and the
mining area is liberated, the war will soon be over.”</p>

<p>“I want to speak to you about my special qualifications for transferring
to the English Service. I was born and educated——”</p>

<p>“Pàv’l Pàvlch,” cried Fanny Ivanovna, “please don’t interrupt. I want
you, Andrei Andreiech, to translate an English letter Nikolai
Vasilievich has received from his former mining-engineer, Mr. Thomson.
Our English is not quite sufficient, though I’ve understood parts of
it.”</p>

<p>I took the letter. Mr. Thomson, writing from an obscure address in
Scotland, stated that the afterwar conditions prevailing in the west of
Europe had frankly disappointed him, and solicited an invitation to be
reinstated in his former post as consulting-engineer in Nikolai
Vasilievich’s gold-mines.</p>

<p>“It’s such a pity,” Fanny Ivanovna sighed. “Mr. Thomson is such a nice
man. And now it seems he is so badly off. It must be terrible for his
wife and children.”</p>

<p>“Well,” said Nikolai Vasilievich, “I say this: it’s no use Mr. Thomson
coming out here <i>at present</i>, while the mines are still in Bolshevik
hands. And I don’t want to hold out false hopes to Mr. Thomson, for one
can never quite be sure what may happen in Siberia yet. But between
ourselves, I may tell you that now that the English have arrived
and—well, that this punitive expedition to the mines has been arranged,
we have good reason to feel optimistic.”</p>

<p>“Well, let’s hope, let’s hope,” said Fanny Ivanovna.</p>

<p>But the three sisters looked as if they didn’t care a hang about Mr.
Thomson, the English, the mines or anybody else.</p>

<p>“Are you going to the dance?” said Nina.</p>

<p>“Which dance?”</p>

<p>“The Russian one—at the Green School.”</p>


<p>“But it will be Russian dances all the time.”</p>

<p>“Doesn’t matter.”</p>

<p>“Russian music, too.”</p>

<p>“We can dance fox-trots to krokoviaks, one-steps to march music, slow
waltzes to anything you like. You must come.”</p>

<p>I knew I was going, but I liked to be asked, and I resisted lingeringly,
to prolong the pleasure.</p>

<p>Of course I was going. Who could have resisted this sliding side-long
look; this shining semicircle of white teeth that revealed itself with
each full smile; this lithe, sylphine young body?</p>

<p>The three sisters affected a stationary fox-trot.</p>

<p>The passions were aroused.</p>

<p>“Nikolai Vasilievich! Papa!”</p>

<p>He was dragged, like a resisting malefactor, struggling, to the piano,
and made to play his one and only waltz. The Baron claimed Vera. Nina
came automatically into my arms. I recaptured some of her familiar
fragrance, as we danced between the sofa and round the table, dodging
sundry chairs. Sonia stood demurely at the wall, abandoned by her
husband in favour of a younger sister, but affecting an unconvincing
<i>moue</i> of mirth. Then, owing to the shortness and simplicity of the
tune, Nikolai Vasilievich’s technique broke down.</p>

<p>“I want to talk to you on this very serious question of transferring to
the English Service.” The Baron had come up to me again. And I resorted
to the classic answer of doubting whether there was “any vacancy.”</p>


<p>“It doesn’t matter <i>where</i>,” he said. “In Persia, or perhaps in
Mesopotamia. I can’t serve here any longer.”</p>

<p>We sat silent in the heated room of the little wooden house creaking in
the wind, and I felt lost and hidden amid all this sun and fir and
solitude around us. Nikolai Vasilievich drank his tea and wondered if
the Bolsheviks would hand him back his house and money at the bank, and
if the Czechs, as obviously they ought, would compensate him for his
loss on the gold-mines. He had great hopes, he said, of the punitive
expedition; but there was one aspect—a moral one—that disturbed him
greatly. He wondered whether the punitive expedition would turn out to
be quite honest and would not do him out of his interests in the
gold-mines altogether.</p>

<p>Afterwards he came up to me and said in a weary undertone: “You know, it
will be very dull to-night—nothing but Russian dance music. Honestly,
it would only spoil your evening if you went.”</p>

<p>“Don’t take any notice of him,” cried the three sisters simultaneously.
“It will be very jolly. He’s only thinking of himself.”</p>

<p>“Nikolai!” cried Fanny Ivanovna. “What nonsense! You’ve already promised
me to come. You’re their father and it’s your duty to take your children
out. I refuse to go alone with them.”</p>

<p>  </p>

<p>As I entered the brilliantly illuminated ball-room, the three sisters,
each claimed by an Allied officer, were fox-trotting, in defiance of the
congregation. Nikolai Vasilievich, wearing a dinner-jacket, looked very
angry, very lonely and very bored; and Fanny Ivanovna looked ominously
triumphant.</p>

<p>“Poor Nikolai Vasilievich!” I said when Fanny Ivanovna and I were alone.
“That dinner-jacket of his looks miserable and frightened as though it
felt the outrage of being dragged into this mock festivity. It seems to
say: ‘What have <i>I</i> done?’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>“Doesn’t matter. He is better where he is.</p>

<p>“He would only be with that girl of his if I had not insisted on his
coming with us,” she added by way of after-thought.</p>

<p>“Zina?”</p>

<p>“<i>Ach!</i> Andrei Andreiech! It makes me so ill, so angry to think of it.”</p>

<p>Then Nikolai Vasilievich, ludicrously festive, strolled up to us.</p>

<p>“Well,” he muttered, yawning into his white-cuffed hand.</p>

<p>“Jolly dance,” I said.</p>

<p>“For those who dance,” he retorted in a voice as though I had foully and
grievously betrayed him.</p>

<p>Then the music ceased abruptly. The three sisters, scantily and
deliciously attired, glided up, and were met with an involuntary
critical examination from the eyes of Fanny Ivanovna, who effected a
few, to all appearance needless, pulls at their evening-gowns.</p>

<p>“I could hardly recognize Nina with her hair like this,” I remarked
aloud.</p>

<p>With sylphine litheness, she slid between me and Baron Wunderhausen to
the drawing-room.</p>


<p>“Really, I don’t like the way you’ve done your hair,” I said. “There’s
nothing at the front.”</p>

<p>Instantly she vanished to the dressing-room; and in her absence the
Baron tackled me again about a billet in Persia or Mesopotamia. I
expressed a mild surprise. “Have we not come here to help the Russian
national cause?” I asked. “Is that then of no interest to you?”</p>

<p>“You know,” he said nonchalantly, “nothing will come of it.”</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>“The Czechs are such awful swine. They’re all Bolsheviks.”</p>

<p>And then added, “And the Americans, too, are Bolsheviks. President
Wilson. Nothing will come of it all.”</p>

<p>And, involuntarily, the conversation at lunch surged back to my mind. I
thought this equalled it in point of sheer “constructive statesmanship.”
And then Nina, now in her original coiffure, returned.</p>

<p>We sat under dusty imitation palm-trees, my sleeve every now and then
touching her shapely naked girlish arms; till Nikolai Vasilievich came
up and gave us supper, insisting on paying for it all himself. I thought
of the poor, long-suffering mines who would eventually have to square
all this, as I surveyed the debris on the table-cloth, while Nikolai
Vasilievich paid the waiter.</p>

<p>When the music, after the due interval, broke out into a resounding
waltz, we all flocked back into the ball-room.</p>


<p>General Bologoevski, who had turned up at the eleventh hour, stood at my
side, and we admired Nina, who now fulfilled a carelessly contrived
engagement. “What eyes! What calves! What ankles!” he was saying. “Look
here, why in heaven don’t you marry her?...”</p>

<p>Driving through the dark and muddy streets, I sat on the folding seat;
the car was packed with members of the family. Tucked away in the corner
opposite, like a purring kitten, was Nina. We began to part
provisionally at their gate; but they asked me to come in. We had cold
ham and tinned salmon and tea with sweets. There was a certain subdued
agitation about my presence in the household at this hour, and once I
heard Fanny Ivanovna’s shrill voice from the adjoining room explain
excitedly to Sonia: “You needn’t drag the bed into the drawing-room till
Andrei Andreiech is gone.”</p>

<p>I had been <i>going</i> for an hour or so. We had said “good night”
innumerable times. Nina clung to me whimsically, ignoring Nikolai
Vasilievich’s desire to be rid of me. They all came out into the tiny
hall and added to the difficulty of my withdrawal. Nina fastened my
great sheepskin overcoat, which appealed to her by reason of its many
straps. I was to come again to-morrow night to supper, and the day
after, and every, every day....</p>

<h3>III</h3>

<p>My tangled memories of Siberia come to me to-day largely as a string of
dances, dinners, concerts, garden-parties, modulated by the atmosphere
of weather and the seasons of the year, with the gathering clouds of the
political situation looming always in the background. And I remember, in
particular, the Admiral’s first <i>thé dansant</i>. As he ran through my
provisional list of guests he frowned and growled a little. “What are
all these women?” he asked.</p>

<p>“You should see them, Admiral,” smiled General Bologoevski.</p>

<p>“Good-looking?”</p>

<p>The General kissed his finger-tips.</p>

<p>“And who is Fanny Ivanovna?”</p>

<p>“A German.”</p>

<p>A shadow came across his face. “I’m damned if I want any Huns in my
house,” he growled; but gave in grudgingly.</p>

<p>Through inadvertence on somebody’s part, the officers of the U.S.
Flagship arrived half an hour before time—an incident which taxed my
capacity for consuming liquor to the utmost pitch. They had also
overdone their kindness by sending us two jazz bands instead of one,
with the result that their almost simultaneous employment in the two
adjoining rooms reserved for dancing proved an experience unsatisfactory
to the ear. As the Hawaian string-band flowed and quivered in a languid,
plaintive waltz, the adjoining brass-band fairly knocked sparks out of
it by bursting into an intoxicating one-step.</p>

<p>Some two hours earlier I had met Vera in the street. She had been to see
their dressmaker about the frock in which now, radiant but bashful, she
appeared. Almost immediately, the family was followed by the Zina-Uncle
Kostia wing, and by Magda Nikolaevna and Čečedek. But they would not
speak to one another. Nikolai Vasilievich had been to see me in the
morning about bringing Zina; and now he tried to dance with her. But
both were awkward and bashful, and the experiment proved unsatisfactory;
while Fanny Ivanovna looked on at them sarcastically. Nina whispered to
me as we one-stepped: “After them! Go after them!” her triangular,
fur-bordered hat bobbing up into my face in the excitement. And as we
overtook them: “Oh, my God!”</p>

<p>Stepping like a duck, Zina would not turn unless warned beforehand, and
even then only half the circle; and Nikolai Vasilievich, exasperated by
his futile efforts, asked impatiently: “Are you dancing in goloshes?
Have you rubber soles on your shoes? Or what <i>is</i> it?”</p>

<p>They gave it up at last and stood by the wall, in everybody’s way,
shamefaced and pitiful; and Zina looked as though she regretted her
insistence on coming to this dance.</p>

<p>“Will you dance?” said I.</p>

<p>“I’ve never danced before,” said she. “But I don’t mind trying.” She
looked up at her lover. Evidently their experiment did not count.
Nikolai Vasilievich smiled feebly.</p>

<p>And, as a preliminary, she stepped on my toe....</p>

<p>My next dance was with Magda Nikolaevna, a beautiful woman enough, but
so delicate and with such an elaborate concoction of accessories by way
of dress that the chief sensation yielded from the dance with her was
one of infinite precaution.</p>

<p>As a <i>pièce de résistance</i>, I danced with a little niece of Uncle
Kostia, Olya Olenin. She was stout and round, like a football, and we
banged into people and against walls carelessly and with the
harmlessness of a football.</p>

<p>“To-day I have grown ten years older,” confided Nikolai Vasilievich, as
I came up to him. “I shall not forget it.”</p>

<p>“You take it much too seriously,” I said.</p>

<p>“I blame myself for being such a fool as to have listened to her. I
didn’t want to come.”</p>

<p>“Nikolai Vasilievich, really!”</p>

<p>“Oh, please don’t take it that way. It was charming of you to ask us. I
like your Admiral ... and that other officer, his assistant, who says
‘Splendid! Splendid!’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>“Sir Hugo,” I supplied.</p>

<p>Then Uncle Kostia, spectacled, and with the air of a profound
philosopher taking stock of his impressions, joined us. “I’ve been
talking to your Admiral,” he said.</p>

<p>“Well?”</p>

<p>“Fine-looking man. Combines the manner of Napoleon I with the mind, I
think, of Napoleon III. Wants to get to Moscow. But what he’ll do when
he gets there (if he gets there), curiously enough doesn’t seem to have
occurred to him! The simplicity of the scheme is touching. All right,
let’s assume he gets there and plants a constitutional Russian
government and retains an Allied army to support it. Will he keep the
Allied troops there indefinitely? And when at last they go, what’s to
prevent the government from collapsing like a pack of cards at the hands
of a population inevitably resentful of foreign interference? Then
there’s your country. You think your country will support you. But it
will be divided.”</p>

<p>“I disagree,” said Nikolai Vasilievich. “I’d much rather, for example,
the gold-mining area was occupied by English troops, or even by the
Japanese, than by the Russians. I know what I am talking about. I am a
typical Russian myself. There are honest men in Russia, and there are
clever men in Russia; but there are no honest clever men in Russia. And
if there are, they are probably heavy drinkers.”</p>

<p>Uncle Kostia “pooh-poohed” this sweeping charge; but Nikolai Vasilievich
continued:</p>

<p>“To take my book-keeper Stanitski. Andrei Andreiech knows him. Dishonest
as you make them. And still I am obliged to keep him on. Why? Because if
I took an honest man he would make such a hash of all the books that I
wouldn’t know where I was at all.”</p>

<p>“But do you know where you are with a dishonest book-keeper, Nikolai
Vasilievich?” said Uncle Kostia with that keen spasmodic interest that
highly abstract men have of taking, periodically, in practical affairs,
almost as a relief from themselves. “I am a man of letters, no business
man in any sense; still it would seem to me——”</p>

<p>“To be candid,” said the other, “it doesn’t matter much either way just
now. Till we can get the gold-mines back there is no doing any business.
I get money in advance occasionally. He sees to the paying of the
interest, which is paid out of the same money, and puts it down in the
books. For the present that is all.”</p>

<p>“Hm!... Still, I should do something about that,” said Uncle Kostia, “if
I may presume to give advice in these matters.”</p>

<p>“When we get the gold-mines there will be time enough to act,” Nikolai
Vasilievich answered somewhat gruffly. “I only mentioned it as an
illustration of the political situation we have to contend with. The
foreigners here must laugh at our methods!”</p>

<p>“Why? They’re only muddling up our issues.”</p>

<p>“The idea,” I attempted to amend Uncle Kostia’s proposition, “is that
the Allied troops should help to raise and train Russian <i>cadres</i> and so
lay the foundation for a new Russian Army which, in its turn, would make
it possible to rebuild the State. It’s not an invasion by foreign
troops. You may rest your mind in peace on that point.”</p>

<p>“Oh!... Oh!... If that’s the idea,” said Uncle Kostia in augmented
tones, “then I am doubly alarmed; for I can guess the elements which
will form the backbone of this new White Russian Army—monarchists
altogether too brainless to realize that theirs is a lost cause.”</p>


<p>“Most of them, I think, would favour a Constitutional Monarchy,”
proffered Nikolai Vasilievich.</p>

<p>“A constitutional monarchy in Russia,” retorted Uncle Kostia, “would
invariably be more monarchical than constitutional.”</p>

<p>“Anyhow,” I said, “do have a drink.”</p>

<p>I could see Sir Hugo’s ruddy, weather-beaten face, as he served Fanny
Ivanovna with her ice-cream; and as I came up to her I overheard her say
to him in German: “I think the Bolsheviks are bound to be beaten soon
because it is impossible to do any trade while they are in power.”</p>

<p>“Splendid!” said Sir Hugo somewhat inconsequently. “Splendid!”</p>

<p>“We simply can’t recover our mines, and Nikolai Vasilievich——”</p>

<p>She stopped....</p>

<p>She danced heavily; and as I turned her each time, revolved a few times
of her own momentum. She sought to direct me by sheer strength of will.
“Who is steering, Fanny Ivanovna? You or me?” I asked in exasperation.</p>

<p>“I am sorry, Andrei Andreiech,” she answered. “I do it unintentionally.”</p>

<p>The Baron asked me for the third time about Persia or Mesopotamia; but
the Admiral’s approach frightened him away.</p>

<p>We watched Kniaz, who was shaking hands cordially with everybody as he
took his leave. “That Kniaz of yours looks as if one day he’d been
unspeakably astonished—and remained so ever since.”</p>


<p>“Look at General Bologoevski, sir, dancing with that painted woman.”</p>

<p>The Admiral’s face drew out and darkened. “That man,” said he, “is the
<i>biggest</i> fool in the Russian Army.” He pondered. “The Russian men are
no damned good. But the women are splendid! What about that Czech
concert to-night? You can bring your women if you like into the box.
Don’t want the men. Ha! ha! ha! Look at old Hugo talking to the young
girls!”</p>

<p>“I’ll ask the three sisters....”</p>

<p>“Those three there sitting on the window-sill?”</p>

<p>“Yes.... And Fanny Ivanovna,” I added.</p>

<p>“All right. Let’s have the Hun.</p>

<p>“Well, Nikolai Vasilievich,” he turned to his guest. “I hear you know
English very well. Where have you picked it up?”</p>

<p>“No, no,” blushed Nikolai Vasilievich; and said in Russian, “Your
English spelling is so difficult. In English you spell a word ‘London’
and pronounce it ‘Birmingham.’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>“Ha! ha! ha! ha!” laughed the Admiral loudly, but with dignity; and then
asked, “Are you comfortable in Vladivostok? Can you get all the food you
want for your family? I hope you will tell me if there is anything I can
do?”</p>

<p>“I am very grateful,” bowed the Russian.</p>

<p>“Now mind you don’t forget to ask....”</p>

<p>Nikolai Vasilievich, as things went, did not forget; nor did he wait to
be asked twice. On the spot he said that he understood the Admiral was
shortly travelling by special train up-country, and all he, Nikolai
Vasilievich, requested was one modest coupé in that special train, as it
was urgent that he should see a certain Russian general at Omsk,
relative to the forthcoming punitive expedition to his gold-mines.</p>

<p>The Admiral returned the classic answer: “I’ll see what I can do.”</p>

<p>“Will you kindly introd<i>oo</i>ce me to the young lady yonder?” said a very
smart, stiff-collared U.S. naval officer. He looked in the direction of
the window-sill.</p>

<p>“Which one?”</p>

<p>The next moment he was dancing with Nina.</p>

<p>“Who’s that officer?” asked General Bologoevski.</p>

<p>“Ward.”</p>

<p>“What eyes! What calves! What ankles!” he sighed again. “Look here,
really, why in the world don’t you marry her?”</p>

<p>“And now,” said I, “it’s my turn,” as the waltz subsided on the last
three beats.</p>

<p>“<i>Tell me</i>,” whined Nigger voices, “<i>why nights are lonesome</i>,” and the
cymbals beat the pulse; “<i>tell me why days are blue</i>....” And we moved
rhythmically to the incantation, stooping, jerking gently, swaying
smoothly, like plants in the water. When the song ceased it was
immediately encored. And when the bands went, a handful of us, those who
had enjoyed it most, lingered for a while. I and Nina, the Baron and his
painted lady, Vera and Holdcroft, danced to the husky gramophone; and
Sonia sat on the window-sill and stared at Holdcroft with unmitigated
admiration.</p>

<p>  </p>

<p>And in the evening I called for them in our car and took them to the
concert. We arrived a little late because at a point in the journey our
progress had been impeded by a car that blocked the road. Inside was a
drunken gentleman who was being urged by the chauffeur to pay his fare.
“Don’t want to pay,” the gentleman responded.</p>

<p>“Then get out!”</p>

<p>“Don’t want to get out.”</p>

<p>“Get out, <i>you</i>——”</p>

<p>“Who’re you talking to?” came from within. “Don’t you know I’m an
officer?”</p>

<p>“Officer. There’s a lot of you here, we know your kind.... Get out!”</p>

<p>“Don’t want to get out.”</p>

<p>“Then kindly pay your fare.”</p>

<p>“Don’t want to pay.”</p>

<p>At length our chauffeur succeeded in disentangling our car. “I’m always
so frightened for the children. Awful language these drunkards use,”
said Fanny Ivanovna.</p>

<p>The theatre, as we entered the box, was a gallery of distinguished
generals, admirals and Allied high commissioners; and the orchestra was
sending forth the plaintive strains of the familiar Czecho-Slovak
marching song.</p>

<p>I sat next to Nina, and the Admiral was in the other corner, half
screened from the public view by the dusty curtain. To the great
delight of Sonia and Fanny Ivanovna, there was the Overture to
<i>Tannhäuser</i>; and as the initial pilgrims’ chorus was being repeated in
its last resort, the conductor urging the executants to ever greater
efforts, and the trombones blazed away their utmost perturbation, a
chuckle of glee and satisfaction spread over the Admiral’s fine-set
face. “There’s more discipline in an orchestra like this,” said he,
“than in a battalion of Marines,” and clapped his hands uproariously.</p>

<p>The concert over, the Admiral dispatched me first in his car with the
family and waited for me to return for him. Driving home through the
warm and starry night, Fanny Ivanovna praised the immaculate politeness
of Sir Hugo; but added afterwards, “He’s frightfully nervous, and keeps
fiddling with something or other all the time.”</p>

<p>“And keeps saying ‘Splendid! Splendid!’<span class="lftspc">”</span> added Nina.</p>

<p>“There’s something curious about his mind, too,” she said.</p>

<p>“Ah! you’ve discovered that!” I laughed. “It’s a grasp of the
inessential, a passion for detail and exactitude unexcelled in creation.
You don’t know him. To-day, for instance, I met him on the landing,
before lunch. ‘Hello!’ he said. ‘Full of work?’ Now it had seemed to me
that he said ‘Full of drink?’ and naturally enough I said, ‘No, not at
this hour, sir.’ ‘At what hour do you start, pray?’ he began, and
thinking he was talking about cocktails, I said, ‘Oh, just before
dinner.’ ‘Hm!’ he said. ‘Just before dinner. I shall have to look into
that.’ ‘I’m sorry, sir,’ I said, ‘I think I must have heard you wrong.
Do you mind telling me again what you said?’ ‘Hm!’ he said, ‘I’ve been
talking to you on this landing for the last three minutes on the basis
of my original inquiry, and you now ask me what it was I said. I said—I
think these were the exact words I used—I said: “Hello!” I said. “Full
of work?”<span class="lftspc">’</span> ‘Full of work?’ I cried, ‘and I thought you said “Full of
drink.<span class="lftspc">’</span> ‘Full of drink,’ he said, ‘full of drink indeed. Good morning
to you!’ And he went his way.”</p>

<p>The car had pulled up.</p>

<p>“Good night, Andrei Andreiech, and thank you very, very much.”</p>

<p>“Good night,” smiled the three sisters.</p>

<p>The Admiral was bucked as we drove home. I knew that he was fond of
young girls. On the other hand, he liked mature women. He praised the
girls. I breathed to him that they had praised him.</p>

<p>The Admiral smiled one of his most adorable smiles.</p>

<p>“Fanny Ivanovna,” I said, “was struck by your appearance.”</p>

<p>The gallant Admiral blushed like a girl.</p>

<p>“There is something in having an appearance,” he said at last.</p>

<p>He looked out into the dark and silent night. Some minutes later he
said, with conviction, “She’s a good woman, that Fanny Ivanovna.”</p>

<p>“Russian women are so much more interesting and fascinating,” I babbled,
“than other women.”</p>


<p>“Yes,” he agreed. “But she’s a Boche.”</p>

<p>“Unfortunately,” I sighed.</p>

<p>The Admiral yawned. “Never mind,” he said. “I don’t mind the Germans.
What I can’t stick are the dirty Bolsheviks.”</p>

<p>“Russian girls,” I continued, “are far more interesting and clever than
other girls.”</p>

<p>“All girls,” the Admiral replied, “are stupid.”</p>

<h3>IV</h3>

<p>Much of my experiences must now appear in the nature of a farce. This is
not my fault. A good deal of life is a hilarious farce, and yet, as in
the case of the affiliation of Nikolai Vasilievich’s family, it all
comes about in the proper constitutional way, through a string of human
motives. For a week or so Nikolai Vasilievich kept on applying to the
Admiral for a coupé in his train to Omsk, in the teeth of implacable
refusals. Then, after much opposition from the Admiral, and a
passionate, though somewhat vague attempt on the part of Nikolai
Vasilievich to identify his personal misfortunes with that of “honest”
Russia, and the doings of the Czechs, the miners, and the punitive
expedition whose disinterestedness he had begun to doubt, with that of
international Bolshevism, this was conceded. But on hearing of this
step, Fanny Ivanovna at once concluded that Nikolai Vasilievich was
trying to escape from her—a suspicion she always entertained—and she
immediately applied to see the Admiral in person and asked for two
additional coupés, to accommodate her and the three sisters. The Admiral
was a sailor and a gentleman. He promised her two coupés.</p>

<p>I forget which wing of the family was the next to apply. I remember that
every day that week our waiting-room was crowded with petitioners. The
Admiral said No. He found himself saying No innumerable times each day.
Now it is an intrinsic part of the Russian character that it does not
accept No for No. It is constitutionally incapable of doing so. Its
institutions are all a negation of that principle. And what is more, it
refuses to confine that fact to within the Russian border. It regards it
in the light of worldwide application, assuming that it is indeed
nothing less than human nature.</p>

<p>The Admiral still said No. He held that it was not human nature but just
Russian nature, and as an illustration of his point he meant to show
that when an Englishman says No he does mean No. But none of them would
understand the Admiral’s interpretation of No. They had all grown up
with the idea that No meant Yes after an adequate amount of pressure and
insistence. The pressure was of various kinds, according to the age, sex
and nature of the applicant. There were tears, entreaties. There were
questions, such as the “object” of the Allies in Siberia, since they
monopolized the best trains and refused to help the Russians in their
primary needs. There were direct questions which it was thought must
needs shatter the impregnability of the Admiral’s No, such as, for
instance: Did the Admiral wish to starve them, as he evidently did, by
cutting them adrift from Nikolai Vasilievich, the bread-winner?</p>

<p>The Admiral still said that No was No, and would they please understand
it? They all replied that No was not the point, the point being: <i>What
were they to do without Nikolai Vasilievich?</i> Whereon the Admiral
replied that when he said a thing he meant it, this being the sterling
value of British character. But they persisted all the same, treating
him as if he were just human like the rest of them. Then the Admiral
became a little angry. It annoyed him that they should fail to
understand the primary fact that an Englishman was not a Russian and
that hence any laxity that held good in Russian character did not hold
good in that of a native of the British Isles. But the Russians hammered
on in spite of all; till the Admiral was heartily amused that they
should indeed know no better than to think that he would give in just
because they persisted, for, the ignorance of human nature that, he
thought, such a belief implied—a quaint and childish ignorance—began
to fascinate him. He looked at them and looked at them again, as they
poured forth their woes ... and marvelled. Indeed, their touching
innocence fascinated him so much that finally he felt he wanted to
humour them, as one is inclined to humour quaint, unreasonable children
who know no better. And it was by way of humouring them that the Admiral
gave way. No (for once only) was to mean Yes. They thanked him
cordially. He sighed and wiped his forehead with his handkerchief. The
Russian character had won the day.</p>

<p>That night we started on our trip along the great, now pitiably
disorganized Siberian track. It was a lovely night in late autumn. The
Admiral’s special train had been brought over on the main line; and the
General and I, both somewhat under the influence of liquor, walked arm
in arm up and down the platform; and the General, in an overflow of
feeling, spoke piteously of his ruined soul, his wasted life, and how he
felt, and what he felt, and why he felt it. The Admiral and Sir Hugo had
already settled down in the drawing-room of the coach, and were
drinking. As the train moved, we too stepped into the carriage and threw
ourselves back on our cushions; and the General’s hand stretched for the
bottle. But I lay back musingly in the dark carriage, thinking of all
things and none in particular, in that agreeable half-conscious way that
is known to precede slumber, as the train rattled on its way to Omsk.</p>

<p>Two carriages behind us was Nikolai Vasilievich with a substantial
proportion of his family, all bound for Omsk. When I closed my eyes I
could see Nina, and my drowsy thoughts would linger: “She is <i>à moi</i>....
Tucked away in that compartment with her sisters.... <i>À moi</i>.... Now
they were undressing for the night.... <i>À moi</i>.... At a handstretch.
Always there. But there was no hurry. O life ... leisurely life ...!”</p>

<p>I was wakened by the General, and we went and joined the Admiral and
Sir Hugo. It seemed that they were both what is known as “lit up.”</p>

<p>“You’re drunk,” the Admiral greeted me.</p>

<p>“And so are you,” I said.</p>

<p>“I know I am, damn you!”</p>

<p>And we were all very jolly and sang “<i>Stenka Razin</i>,” the Russian robber
song, while the train rattled westward. And the General’s eyes were
moist with tears: he was happy in his melancholy. And, tearfully
emotional, he crept to the Admiral, and clinging to his neck tried to
kiss him.</p>

<p>“Go away!” cried the Admiral in the manner of an innocent young girl
about to be accosted; and then in a more manly tone:</p>

<p>“Damn your eyes!”</p>

<p>And then the General leaned back with that exaggerated leisure peculiar
to his condition, and sang a Russian gipsy song. He spoke of the good
old pre-war days. He sighed, sighed deeply. Now everything seemed to
have gone wrong, no doubt because his wife who ran him was not here to
look after him. But he expected her to come and then all would be well.
If he was in a muddle, if he was in debt, as he invariably was, he
merely turned to his creditors and said, “I don’t understand all this.
Wait till my wife arrives. It’s a damrotten game, you know, without my
wife. My wife she is a clever woman. She will put it all right with you.
My wife she is a dragoon.”</p>

<p>In the night the train stopped at a wayside station and seemed as though
it would never start again. The Admiral then sent out the General to
find out what was the matter, and Sir Hugo, who attributed the cause to
“bad staff work,” proffered the suggestion of “negotiating” with the
station-master. But the General said he thought the station-master was a
most “damrotten fellow,” in the case of which type he usually relied on
“elemental” measures. Accordingly he drew out his pistol and threatened
to shoot the station-master like a dog unless he cleared the line
immediately. The station-master, used to these methods, took no heed of
the warning, but said that he would lodge a vigorous protest through the
usual channels. Whereon the General replaced the pistol in his pouch,
remarking that life was a “damrotten game.”</p>

<p>What a trip!...</p>

<p>In the morning I observed the Admiral talking to Fanny Ivanovna in his
deliberate manner, looking into her eyes. And the impression I received
was that the Admiral thought Fanny Ivanovna was a “good fellow.” But the
three sisters, bashful though they were when he spoke to them in
English, had somehow overlooked him; though Nina once remarked, “How
awfully funnily his mouth protrudes when he looks at you so seriously. I
feel so shy because I feel <i>he</i> does.”</p>

<p>“Now with all this English influence behind him Nikolai Vasilievich
ought to be able to find out something definite about his mines at
Omsk,” Fanny Ivanovna confided to me. “And there is no doubt this time
we’re travelling in comfort. The children are so pleased. You know,
they are so childish. Any change like this amuses them.” And then, in a
lowered voice: “Anything like that—love—I assure you, they know
absolutely nothing about. They’re such children!”</p>

<p>“But Sonia’s married!” I remonstrated.</p>

<p>“<i>Ach!</i> how that angers me! And to whom, to <i>whom</i>! He can’t even wash
his neck. It’s all that mother!”</p>

<p>And so we covered verst after verst, as our luxurious train, freshly
painted, beautifully furnished, admirably kept, rushed through a
stricken land of misery. On our choice engines we moved like lightning,
or perchance stood long hours at lonely wayside stations, the glamour of
innumerable electric lights within our carriages presenting to a
community of half-starving refugees the gloating picture of the Admiral
and his “staff” at dinner.</p>

<p>And so we arrived at Lake Baikal, that crystal sea imprisoned in a frame
of snow-capped mountains. We stopped our train and lingered on the
rocks, drank in the harmony of a strange light, glassy water, snow, fir,
and perfect quietude; and when at last we said good-bye to Lake Baikal,
that proudest of lakes, a gale fearful and furious had blown in upon
this serenity of beauty and lashed huge waves in the inky blackness of
the night.</p>

<p>On went the train, rushing and swaying through the windy space of the
fields.</p>

<p>What a trip! How we argued and wrangled the long journey through!
Sometimes we would almost come to blows; for the ordinary Russian does
not argue: he shouts, and his opponent, to score his point, shouts
louder and quicker. The Russian General combined intellectual vagueness
with an emotional temperament; and, contriving to identify his country
with his class, he discovered that his country had been grievously
insulted by me. All was over between us. He would never speak to me
again.</p>

<p>But that evening, after dinner, we sat together over a bottle of whisky,
and the General became emotional. “You are young and foolish,” he said,
“and you probably don’t know what you are talking about. I don’t. But
you love Russia. Tell me you love Russia; don’t you? We both love
Russia. She’s been degraded and trampled on; but she is a fine country.
She will arise. She must arise. And we both love Russia.” He cried.
“Tell me you love Russia. Tell me you love her. We Russians are lazy,
drunken, good-for-nothing swine; but we are good people, aren’t we? It’s
a holy land. It’s a holy people. Look at her.” He gazed out of the
window.</p>

<p>I rose and stood by him, and we looked at Russia, whirling past. Then I
left him. When I returned, the General was still lying on the sofa, but
his melancholy had vanished and he was spitting at the ceiling, probably
for want of anything better to do.</p>

<p>On we went. Two days before we had left Irkutsk. The train rushed and
roared and rattled. It was a weather that breeds pessimists. I stood
looking out upon the steppes, these immense, monotonous Siberian
plains, dull and melancholy in the rain, when Zina came to me and said
her mother wished to see me privately. As I entered her coupé the old
lady was drinking tea. She bade me sit down.</p>

<p>“It’s about Uncle Kostia,” she began. She sighed, and there was a
prolonged pause. “Cleverness! Wisdom!... Oh, I don’t know, Andrei
Andreiech. God in heaven knows”—she crossed herself—“that we are
groping in the dark and none of us know what we are about or what’s
what, and I am an old ignorant, sinful woman. But if you ask me, Andrei
Andreiech, I’d just as soon have a fool as a wise man. Take Uncle
Kostia. Such a clever man—and what’s the good of it? I am stupid, dotty
in my old age, but really I don’t see where all his cleverness is
leading to. And I say it is time he did something and gave up living
upon others. Zina tells me she can’t keep on asking Nikolai Vasilievich
for money, and I really do think it is time Uncle Kostia began to work
... and published something. I thought perhaps you could get the Admiral
to place him on some paper—propaganda of some sort. It isn’t that one
is sorry to keep Uncle Kostia. He is clever, they all say. Heaven knows
he has lived on his brother long enough, and one was never sorry to give
him all he wanted since the man is clever, you understand, and writes.
But now there is nothing to give ... since there <i>is</i> nothing, you see?
I don’t want to appear obdurate or unfeeling; but I thought perhaps you
could talk it over with Uncle Kostia. I know he likes you and he might
listen to you.”</p>

<p>I went, promising to do what I could.</p>

<p>When I knocked at the door of Uncle Kostia’s coupé it was late in the
afternoon. The train rushed, and the dreary monotonous steppes receded,
whirling past. Twilight was falling within and without. The candles had
not yet been lit. Then the door of the coupé was pulled open and
revealed Uncle Kostia sitting on the sofa, laboriously rubbing his eyes.
I inquired if I had disturbed him. He assured me that I had not. He
sprinkled some <i>eau de Cologne</i> on his hands and rubbed his face—a
substitute for washing—then made room for me on the sofa, and rubbing
his eyes with his fists he yawned widely and looked at the window. The
melancholy of the Siberian plain must have communicated itself to both
of us. For a time we sat in silence, contemplating the unspeakable
disorder of the coupé. I was about to frame an adequate sentence to open
conversation when he preceded me.</p>

<p>“There!” he said, and struck his forehead with his palm. “And I am
called a clever man. Andrei Andreiech, I have been thinking. I have been
thinking a good deal these last days.” He stopped abruptly.</p>

<p>“What have you been thinking about, Uncle Kostia?” I asked.</p>

<p>“That’s just the trouble,” he said, “I can’t tell you.”</p>

<p>I waited.</p>

<p>“I don’t know myself,” he explained.</p>


<p>I still waited.</p>

<p>“I have been thinking of this and that and the other, in fact, of one
thing and another—precious but elusive thoughts, Andrei Andreiech.
Beautiful emotions. A kaleidoscope of the most subtle colours, if I may
so express myself. And, Andrei Andreiech, it has taught me a great
truth. It has taught me the futility of writing.”</p>

<p>“But now really, Uncle Kostia,” I remonstrated.</p>

<p>“Don’t interrupt me,” said Uncle Kostia. “It is a truth that only ten
per cent, if that, of the substance of our thoughts and feelings can be
transferred on paper. It can’t be done, Andrei Andreiech—and that’s all
there is to it.</p>

<p>“And when I think what a fool I have been, writing all these years,
toiling, slaving at a desk like a clerk—when I ought to have been
thinking, only thinking.”</p>

<p>“But, Uncle Kostia——” I began.</p>

<p>“Andrei Andreiech, it’s no use. How can I <i>write</i> down what I think? The
subtlety, the privacy, the exquisite intimacy, the thousand and one
inexplicable impulses that prompt and make up thought and stir
emotion.... Andrei Andreiech, how can I? Think! how can I? Oh, you are
hopeless ... hopeless!... To-day I have been thinking. It will seem
nothing to you if I tell you; it will seem nothing to me if I tell it;
but, believe me, it was something infinitely deep, infinitely complex,
infinitely beautiful just when I thought of it—without the labour of
exertion.”</p>


<p>“What was it, Uncle Kostia?” I inquired.</p>

<p>“It was vague,” he said evasively.</p>

<p>“Oh, come, Uncle Kostia?”</p>

<p>“How can I tell? I know too much.”</p>

<p>I was aware of the unpleasant shrinking of ideas when set down on paper.
So I persisted:</p>

<p>“Come on, Uncle Kostia! out with it!”</p>

<p>“Well,” said Uncle Kostia, and his face became that of a mystic. “I
thought, for instance—I wonder if you will understand me?—I thought:
<i>Where</i> are we all going?”</p>

<p>“Hm,” I said significantly.</p>

<p>“I thought: <i>Why</i> are we all moving?”</p>

<p>“You have not far to seek for motives,” said I. “I presume there are
motives in each case.”</p>

<p>“Motives!” he cried. “That is the very point. There are no motives. The
motives are naught. It is the consequences. <i>Where</i> are we going? <i>Why</i>
are we going? Look: we are moving. <i>Going</i> somewhere. <i>Doing</i> something.
The train rushes through Siberia. The wheels are moving. The
engine-drivers are adding fuel to the engines. Why? Why are we here?
What are we doing in Siberia? Where are we heading for? Something.
Somewhere. But <i>what? Where? Why?</i>”</p>

<p>I think I must have misunderstood Uncle Kostia’s subtle thoughts. Or was
it that my commission was continually in my mind? But I asked him:</p>

<p>“Is it that you are doomed by your sense of inutility, Uncle Kostia?”</p>


<p>His eyes flashed. He spoke impatiently: “<i>My</i> inutility! <i>Your</i>
inutility! What the devil does it matter <i>whose</i> inutility? Is your
Admiral very <i>utile</i>, may I ask? What I was saying was that we all
behaved as if we were actually <i>doing</i> things, boarding this
Trans-Siberian Express as if in order to <i>do</i> something at the end of
the journey, while actually the journey is in excess of anything we are
likely to achieve.”</p>

<p>But I thought I would keep him to the point, that is to say, <i>my</i> point.
“Then would you rather not travel in this train, Uncle Kostia?”</p>

<p>An anxious look came into his eyes.</p>

<p>“Why? I like travelling in this train. I am comfortable.”</p>

<p>“But the futility of it?”</p>

<p>“Oh!” groaned Uncle Kostia at my stupidity. “Can’t you understand that
it is the very fact of this physical futility that inflates me with a
sense of spiritual importance?”</p>

<p>I looked at him with a blank expression.</p>

<p>“When I am at home—I mean anywhere at a standstill—I am wretched
intolerably. I write and I think——” He stopped.</p>

<p>“What?”</p>

<p>“<i>What</i> am I writing for: what on earth am I thinking for?”</p>

<p>“So you have doubts?”</p>

<p>“Yes, at moments I am seized by misgivings: what is it all for? I ask.”</p>

<p>“I see.”</p>


<p>“Now it is different. We are moving, apparently <i>doing</i> something,
<i>going</i> somewhere. One has a sense of accomplishing something. I lie
here in my coupé and I think: It is good. At last I am doing something.
Living, not recording. Living! Living! I look out of the window, and my
heart cries out: Life! Life! and so living, living vividly, I lapse into
my accustomed sphere of meditation, and then before I know exactly where
I am I begin to meditate: Where are we all going to? Isn’t our journey
the kernel of absurdity? And so, by contrast, as it were, I gain a sense
of the importance of meditation.... That is how we deceive ourselves,
Andrei Andreiech.”</p>

<p>“And you can do it in spite of being conscious of the deception
involved?”</p>

<p>“I have been unconscious of it,” he said, “until you forced me into
introspection.”</p>

<p>Then, after a pause, I was tickled into inquiring:</p>

<p>“Why don’t you—er—publish some of it, eh, Uncle Kostia?”</p>

<p>Uncle Kostia grabbed his beard into his fist and looked at me with pity
rather than with scorn and made a movement as if he was going to spit
out of sheer disgust, but evidently thought better of it. “You have a
front of brass,” he said. “I cannot penetrate it.”</p>

<p>“Look here, Uncle Kostia,” I cried impatiently, “you must be reasonable
and think of poor Nikolai Vasilievich. He can’t go on supporting
everybody.”</p>

<p>“He hasn’t said anything, has he?” he asked anxiously.</p>


<p>“No ... but....” I paused to enable him to say the obvious.</p>

<p>“He wouldn’t,” said Uncle Kostia. “He is wonderful. I admire him.”</p>

<p>I returned to my coupé. It was evening now and the lights were lit.
Dismal forests stretched over hundreds of versts. I lay back and the
ideas let loose by Uncle Kostia set to work in my mind. And I thought:
Where are we heading? Why? What is it all for? And then I thought of the
war with its hysterical activity; I pictured soldiers boarding trains,
to return to the front; the loading of ships with war matériel; the rush
in the Ministry of Munitions. I thought of the Germans seething with
energy in just the same way; and I contrasted in my mind this hustling
activity, this strained efficiency with the pitiable weakness in the
intellectual conception of the conflict, and I understood that the man
had been essentially right, that our journeys were in excess of our
achievements. Our life was an inept play with some disproportionately
good acting in it. Then, as I dreamed away, I heard Fanny Ivanovna
talking to somebody in the adjoining coupé. I pulled my door open and I
could now hear her voice distinctly. I listened. I was vastly tickled. I
wondered to whom it was that she was telling her autobiography. Then I
heard occasional expressions of assent in Sir Hugo’s trim and careful
Russian. I leaned forward, the incarnation of attention.</p>

<p class="astc">* * * * * </p>

<p>“He would come to me in the evening and say, ‘Fanny, I don’t know what
I would do without you....’</p>

<p class="astc">* * * * * </p>

<p>“He came to me one evening in April and said, ‘Fanny, I must speak to
you very seriously....’</p>

<p class="astc">* * * * * </p>

<p>“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>It is love, this time, real love. I thought that I had loved, I <i>had</i>
loved, <i>you</i>, Fanny, but this is the love that comes once only, to which
you yield gloriously, magnificently, or you are crushed and broken and
thrust aside....’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p class="astc">* * * * * </p><div class="pg_body_wrapper">º1	a

</div><p>I felt my heart beat violently within me. I waited for Sir Hugo’s
detailed cross-examination; but indeed there was little of it. Only
once, when Fanny Ivanovna referred to Nikolai Vasilievich’s wife did Sir
Hugo stop her with an apology, to inquire “<i>Which</i> wife?”</p>

<p>The train rushed through the autumn night; the windows now were black
and revealed nothing. Interlacing with the din, squeal and rattle of the
wheels, now and then my ear would catch familiar fragments of the
monologue.</p>

<p class="astc">* * * * * </p>

<p>“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Nikolai!’ I cried. ‘<i>Du bist verrückt</i> ... <i>wahnsinnich!</i> ...’</p>

<p class="astc">* * * * * </p>

<p>“I cried and he cried with me....</p>

<p class="astc">* * * * * </p>

<p>“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Think of the children, Nikolai! They are your children....’</p>


<p class="astc">* * * * * </p>

<p>“I said to him: ‘I shall wait till you pay me off. I shall not leave
otherwise.’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p class="astc">* * * * * </p>

<p>I felt indeed I was on the summits of existence. Why should <i>I</i> be
treated to such stupendous depths of irony? There beyond the clouds the
gods were laughing, laughing voluptuously. I could not sit still. With
all my heart I craved to have a peep, if only at Sir Hugo’s face. I
thought I’d give my life to know what was his verdict on the situation.
Noiselessly I stole into the corridor, and bending forward with infinite
precaution, I peeped at the interior of the coupé. They sat next each
other. Under the shaded light projected the ruddy weather-beaten face of
Sir Hugo. Sir Hugo looked—how shall I describe it?—he looked as if he
thought it was a case of damned bad staff work.</p>

<p>The train rushed on, noisily swaying through the silence of the night. I
went back to my coupé, and passing Uncle Kostia’s kennel I overheard the
finale of what must have been a frantic theological discussion between
Uncle Kostia and the General. The General, drunk, his fundamental
principles of faith all uprooted and scattered in disorder about the
coupé, furious, with hair dishevelled, cried out to Uncle Kostia:</p>

<p>“Well, <i>is</i> there a God, or <i>is</i> there no God?”</p>

<p>“How do <i>I</i> know?” snapped Uncle Kostia angrily. “Go away!”</p>


<h3>V</h3>

<p>When the train arrived at Omsk, the new régime of Kolchak had been
established. The Admiral was distinctly pleased with the change; for he
no longer believed in granting the Russian people a Constituent Assembly
because he had grounds for thinking that the Russian people, if given
this opportunity, would take advantage of it and elect a government
other than that of Kolchak. And the Admiral was rather fond of little
Kolchak, whose interpretation of democracy was that of denying the
people the choice of government until such time as by some vague,
mysterious, but anyhow protracted, system of education he hoped their
choice would fall upon his own administration. We lived in our train, a
verst or thereabouts from the station—a thoroughly unwholesome place;
and the Admiral diverted most of his time by throwing empty tobacco tins
at the pigs that dwelt in the ditches around the train. “You have no
conception what a pig a pig really is,” he said, “till you see an Omsk
pig.”</p>

<p>“Splendid!” said Sir Hugo. “Splendid!”</p>

<p>“There she goes again!” yelled the Admiral, and hit an old big sow with
a Navy Cut tobacco tin.</p>

<p>“Splendid effort!” said Sir Hugo. “Splendid effort!”</p>

<p>“I give dem h-h-hell!” roared General Bologoevski. “Damrotten pigs!”
But, as usual, his threat remained an empty one.</p>

<p>But while most of us were very much at sea as to why exactly we had
arrived at Omsk, Nikolai Vasilievich seemed immune from doubt. Nikolai
Vasilievich, suspicious of the punitive expedition, had arrived at the
seat of the anti-Bolshevik Administration to seek redress and
compensation in regard to his gold-mines. I think it was chiefly for my
British uniform that Nikolai Vasilievich asked me to accompany him on
his visit to the General at the General Staff, before whom he was going
to lay his case. I noticed that Nikolai Vasilievich had always had a
curious habit of establishing some connexion between his personal
grievance and some powerful outside influence, as, for example, the
general question of Allied intervention; and he insisted that he and we
and intervention were really all one affair, and that hence a favourable
solution of his financial difficulties was all part and parcel of that
scheme which aimed at the defeat of Bolshevism.</p>

<p>We entered a large dirty waiting-room where crowds of petitioners
awaited their turn with a patience that bordered on spiritual
resignation: after the Russian manner they all desired to see the head
man personally, whose life was consequently spent in interviews. A nasty
dirty little woman with a nasty dirty little child, pointing at me with
a dirty finger, was saying to her howling offspring, in an attempt to
pacify her next-of-kin, “Is that your daddy, is he? Is that your daddy?”</p>

<p>The General was an elusive person, a wily man, a master in the art of
compromise. He was the idol of the Allies. He was one of those few who
could so wangle things, so balance favours, as to please at once all the
multitudinous Allies and even curry favour with a large majority of
Russians. His habitual procedure was this. If an Ally asked him, for
example, for the allotment of a certain building, he always promised
without reserve. Then the Russian organization in possession of that
building would at once cry out in protest; and he immediately assured
them that they would be allowed to keep the building: the whole matter,
he explained, was a mere misunderstanding. Then the Russian organization
stayed, and when the Ally came to take the building over they referred
the Ally to the General. And when the Ally came to him and asked for
explanation, the General, with a charming smile, would say, “Well, you
see that building is not really suitable for your use. I will find you a
better one.” Then the Ally waited. He must have time, the General said;
and actually he played on time, on “evolution.” And in the meantime
there was a <i>coup d’état</i>; or the Russian organization went bankrupt; or
the particular Allied representative who had been worrying him was
replaced by another, with whom the General would begin again at the
beginning; or the Allied troops were about to be withdrawn; or the city
was recaptured by the Sovets; or there was a fire and the correspondence
was buried in the flames. He was a man who had no use whatever for “free
will” and played entirely on “predestination.”</p>

<p>The General listened to Nikolai Vasilievich’s emotional narrative in a
friendly manner, and smiling pleasantly he rose and shook hands, as if
to show that the interview was at an end, saying, “You may rest assured
that it will be quite all right. Call again one of these days.”</p>

<p>Nikolai Vasilievich went out, beaming. “Well,” he said, “it seems
settled.” I tendered my heartiest congratulations.</p>

<p>Then “one of these days” we called upon the General a second time.
Nikolai Vasilievich laid great stress on the dastardly action of the
Czechs—that nation just then being out of court with the government at
Omsk—but the General merely said, “Wait till the Supreme Ruler returns
from Perm. I can do nothing without the Supreme Ruler.”</p>

<p>Nikolai Vasilievich then waited for the return of the Supreme Ruler; and
presently we called again. The General’s manner, as he received us, was
considerably less sunny than it had been on the two previous occasions.
“You have been here before,” he greeted Nikolai Vasilievich. “You must
have patience and wait.”</p>

<p>“<i>Wait?</i>” asked Nikolai Vasilievich in a tone of secret terror, the
terror of a man who had been doing naught else all his life—and knew
its meaning.</p>

<p>“Yes, I advise you to wait. Have patience.”</p>

<p>“How long?” asked Nikolai Vasilievich.</p>

<p>“How do I know?” the General replied. “Wait—and you will see.”</p>

<p>Now, was it that Nikolai Vasilievich had waited long enough and seen
nothing? Was it that in the circumstances he thought it sounded too
much like a mockery? Or was it the explosion of that brewing
restlessness that he had gathered in the years of intermittent waiting:
the last puff of ineffectual remonstrance before his final sinking into
hopeless resignation? But suddenly Nikolai Vasilievich went wild. I had
never seen him in that state before. He abused the General in immoderate
terms. He accused him first of turning honest people into Bolsheviks;
then of being in the pay of Moscow. He threatened to lead a rebellion
against the Kolchak State. Nikolai Vasilievich ceased to be a man and
became an incarnation: Man having lost his patience: Humanity gone wild
in the waiting. He thundered forth at the adversary, and his ruined
hopes were the woes of Humankind. Then, coming to the end of his
intellectual resources, but far from having yet exhausted his spiritual
wrath, he made reference to the Day of Judgment. The door into the
chancery flew open, and the Chief of Staff, the Aide-de-camp, and heads
of various departments dashed upon the scene, wondering what on earth
had happened; and shouting loudly Nikolai Vasilievich hurled abuse upon
the Chief-of-Staff, the Aide-de-camp, and the heads of various
departments. And then in the waiting-room he went for a stray Admiral, a
petitioner like himself, and hurled abuse at him as well.</p>

<p>“All right,” the General said at length. “All right. If you won’t be
reasonable, I shall have to resort to the recognized procedure. Guard!”
And he ordered them to take Nikolai Vasilievich away. Nikolai
Vasilievich still raged and fluttered, and the guards came up to him
with signs of deference and indecision. “Come on, sir,” they persuaded
him, “he really means it.” And taking him each under one arm, they
dragged him out into the open.</p>

<p>We walked back to the train.</p>

<p>“What those people will not realize,” I took it up to humour him, “is
that you can’t live on nothing. Waiting doesn’t feed you, and waiting
doesn’t clothe you; and when you have a family——”</p>

<p>“Of course, one can borrow,” said Nikolai Vasilievich.</p>

<p>“Yes, of course,” I agreed.</p>

<p>Fanny Ivanovna greeted him with “Well, Nikolai, is it all arranged?”</p>

<p>A fiendish look came on his face, as though he said, “The hell it is!”
and all the more fiendish because he did not say it.</p>

<p>She sighed conspicuously. And her sigh gave him a nervous shudder. A
look of hate came into his steel-grey eyes. “She even sighs
offensively,” he said to me, “as though she meant to charge me with the
necessity of doing so.”</p>

<p>“Nikolai!” she cried, “don’t let yourself go before strangers. What will
Andrei Andreiech think of you! You know I am not to blame because the
mines won’t pay. And you ought to remember that I advised you to sell
them long ago, and if you had listened to me then we shouldn’t have been
in this plight. Well, well, it’s no use quarrelling now. We’ve got to
wait, that’s all.”</p>


<p>The ironic fascination of the situation at this point proved
irresistible. “There’s an English proverb,” I supplied: “<span class="lftspc">‘</span>All things
come to him who waits.’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>“Hm!” said Nikolai Vasilievich.</p>

<p>“And there’s another one: ‘Rome wasn’t built in a day.’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>“Excellent proverbs!” he said dryly.</p>

<p>Kniaz popped his head out from behind the paper, like a mouse, and
added, “There’s our own Russian proverb, too: ‘The slower you drive the
farther you get.’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>“You, Kniaz, had better read your paper,” retorted Nikolai Vasilievich
acidly. “What does it say in there?”</p>

<p>I stood at the window of the stationary train and watched the sinking
landscape dissolve in the gathering gloom about us. Why did the winter
air seem so acutely strange, as if charged with something, a kind of
tenderness, a warm, transfiguring love ...? Nikolai Vasilievich came to
my side and watched, his hands in his trouser pockets.</p>

<p>“Pigs in the ditches,” he brooded, “pigs in offices, everywhere.... A
town of pigs. That General ... oh! what a pig....”</p>

<h3>VI</h3>

<p>The “affiliation” of Eisenstein into our “society” was a tribute to his
own unflagging perseverance. It so happened that while in Vladivostok
the Admiral had been in urgent need of a dentist, and quite by accident
he tumbled against Eisenstein, who had set up a practice there. The
Admiral, though he loathed all Jews, was yet favourably impressed by
Eisenstein because on his first visit to him he heard Eisenstein engage
in a vigorous cursing of his Chinese servant. He liked to see a man who
knew how to put “these people” in their places, a man who knew how to
assert his own authority, a man who did not talk about “equality” and
such-like tosh (discordant with his sentiment), “utopia,” “socialism,”
and that sort of thing, you know, that has made the world, etc. etc.
There was altogether too much Bolshevism abroad, and the vigorous action
of the dentist with his Chink appealed to him unspeakably.</p>

<p>“This clamouring for allowing men from below to come up to the top and
not imposing individuals of the old governing class from above,” he
said. “All damned well to talk like that, but in the meantime is anarchy
to be allowed to continue unchecked? Apparently so.”</p>

<p>“Orright! Orright!” said Eisenstein.</p>

<p>This seemed the only word he knew in English. But it did not baffle him
in the least; indeed he preferred to converse in English by means of its
continual solitary use to any reasonable conversation in Russian; and
when the Admiral spoke Russian to him he still replied, “Orright!
Orright!” The Admiral had found him an amazing dentist. The Admiral’s
teeth and dentistry seemed the subject he was least interested in of
all. He talked politics and finance. At intervals strange men and women
of a strong Hebrew strain would run into the room, and Eisenstein,
leaving the Admiral with his mouth wide open and cotton-wool stuck under
his tongue, would exchange queries in a quick and agitated manner with
these dark intruders. The Admiral would hear such phrases as “What is
the yen to-day? How much is the dollar?” And if the Admiral chanced to
touch the question of finance, Eisenstein would pounce upon him with
inquiries: “Do you want dollars? How many dollars? Or can I sell you
francs?” Or suddenly he would ask the Admiral to recommend his being
made a British subject. Where was the difficulty? He could always change
his name Eisenstein to Ironstone, which, he believed, sounded jolly well
in English.</p>

<p>In a crisis he would suddenly drop his instruments on the floor and rely
upon his naked hands, which by the way, he never washed between his
clients. He was always one of two things: either extremely optimistic,
when he said that the most violent pain was nothing; or very
pessimistic, when he said that nothing could be done to alleviate the
pain. Sometimes he was extremely indolent and said that nothing was
required to be done and all was well; and sometimes violently
enthusiastic for huge undertakings, for the most drastic and sweeping
reforms, for extracting all the remaining teeth in the Admiral’s mouth
and substituting gold all over, and all sorts of crowns and bridges of
his own invention that ran into four-figure dollars and were evidently
going to hang loose in the Admiral’s mouth. All the while he would talk
and inflict his own political views on his clients, which were that the
English were both fools and clever knaves: the apparent contradiction
did not disturb him in the least; and if the Admiral showed any
inclination to contradict some amazing insinuation, he would just press
the needle a little and manipulate it on the nearest nerve in the tooth
and so silence all opposition. He would talk of the exchange at
Vladivostok and of how easy it was to make money, and when asked how to
do it he would say you had only to turn one currency into another,
whether yen, dollars, sterling or roubles, and a vast fortune was
assured you, evidently quite irrespective of the order of turnover, or
the particular currency, or the amount employed, or the rate at which
the transactions were being effected. He would talk all the while, never
stopping the whole time the client was there; and then at the finish
stick a piece of saturated cotton-wool into any hole in any tooth, take
no heed of your protests, and tell you to come again any time, any
day—when he would keep you waiting for whole hours at a stretch. He
would see you out, shouting in the passage in reply to any question you
might have put: “Orright! Orright!” as he closed the door upon you; and
then turn to the next patient.</p>

<p>He attended to the Admiral’s teeth twice in Vladivostok, and then
hearing through a third person that the Admiral was not quite satisfied
with the finality of his work, he left the coast and joined the Admiral
on his own initiative at Omsk (in order to evade military service at the
Base), and now stated that he was a member of the Admiral’s party. He
was followed by Baron Wunderhausen, now a second lieutenant in Kolchak’s
Army, who arrived in Omsk and asked the Admiral to take him on as his
interpreter. This was conceded. The young Baron, who said that he was
anxious to help, displayed a curious lack of judgment, or if his aim was
flattery, a curious ignorance of the art. He held that Russia was a
“feminine” nation, which should be controlled and directed by a
“masculine” nation like England; and that Great Britain should raise,
equip, and officer an army of Buriats, Khirghiz, Kalmucks, and other
native races in order to conquer Russia. As for himself, the Baron
wanted to wash his hands of the whole business, to get into the British
Army, to renounce his Russian nationality, and get a post somewhere in
Persia or Mesopotamia. It seemed more and more as one lived longer that
to get White Russia on her legs was like trying to get a featherbed to
stand on end.</p>

<p>Occasionally we would visit the front, and the Admiral would interfere
in everything. He would look and shake his head: the pace and method of
extermination would appear to him thoroughly inadequate. We stood behind
a gunner who kept on firing at a tree, as such; apparently for no other
reason.</p>

<p>“What are you firing at?” the Admiral asked.</p>

<p>The man pointed at the tree.</p>


<p>“Are there any Reds behind?”</p>

<p>The man shrugged his shoulders. The question to him seemed immaterial.</p>

<p>“Have you got a telephone there?”</p>

<p>The man shook his head.</p>

<p>“But what are you aiming at?”</p>

<p>He pointed at the tree.</p>

<p>It transpired that four regiments composing the division had gone over
to the enemy that very morning. Of the division there remained just
fourteen men, the Commander and his divisional headquarters, comprising
about three hundred officers. We saw the Commander in his office and
asked him what he thought he would do. He said that he would wait; he
thought the men might return.</p>

<p>“Who are you counting on,” said the Admiral sarcastically, “God?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Your Excellency,” sighed the Commander, “we have no one else to
count upon.”</p>

<p>And the Admiral felt shamed.</p>

<p>But the men, it seems, did not return. They ran as fast as their legs
would carry them over to the Bolshevik lines, and the Bolsheviks,
thinking that they were being attacked by overwhelming numbers, fled in
disorder....</p>

<p>The Admiral was gloomy. The wind cut us in the face in our rapid drive.
Slowly and gradually afternoon evolved into evening.</p>

<p>“That <i>Peking and Tientsin News</i>,” I broke the silence, “seems to be
somewhat pro-Bolshevik.”</p>


<p>“It’s always pro-Something,” the Admiral grunted.</p>

<p>He looked out of the window of the car on the vast snow-covered plains
stretching all around us and brooded darkly.</p>

<p>“Some people,” said he, “think snow beautiful. I think it idiotic.”</p>

<p>  </p>

<p>Although technically the presence of Nikolai Vasilievich’s family on our
train was but a temporary measure, yet it was recognized by all, through
that deeper human instinct that defies illusion, that there was an
element of permanence about it that would give points to the oak tree.
Of course, the Admiral could always have cleared his train of the family
by subjecting them to a prolonged machine-gun fire; but, as with
soldiers, diplomats and politicians, the personal morality of sailors is
much above their national morality. Need I say that they remained? The
motive of their journey was that Nikolai Vasilievich was perpetually
compelled to see some General in some town along the line about his
gold-mines, for his gathering suspicions concerning the integrity of the
punitive expedition had now been amply justified. And then, as time went
on, the motive, as motives do, dissolved into a habit. But the relations
between the Zina-Uncle Kostia wing and that of Fanny Ivanovna and the
three sisters, and similarly, the relations between Fanny Ivanovna and
Magda Nikolaevna, were far from satisfactory. At wayside stations and
impromptu halts in fields and glades and valleys, when we all left the
train and hastened to take exercise, there had been awkward situations;
and when the three sisters had occasion to pass Zina or any of her
little sisters they never failed to put out their tongues at
them—presumably as a sign of disapproval of Nikolai Vasilievich’s
approval of them.</p>

<p>We parted with them as we got back to Vladivostok; but they continued
coming to our parties; and the rumour spread that Fanny Ivanovna was, as
they say, <i>bien vue</i> at the Admiral’s “Court.” Only once, the very
haughty wife of an insignificant officer, newly landed at the port,
sounded the alarm: “A <i>Problem</i> has arisen in <i>Society</i>! <i>Can</i> we
receive a German, or <i>can</i> we not?” But the problem, like so many
problems, died its death without solution.</p>

<h3>VII</h3>

<p>It was the day after General Gaida’s unsuccessful rising. “They’ve gone
out for a walk with those three American naval officers,” Fanny Ivanovna
told me when I called. “Just the two of us, as usual,” she added
somewhat bitterly. Kniaz, seated in the corner, audibly confirmed her
statement, as it were, by sucking sweets. There was an acute scent of
eau-de-Cologne in the room.</p>

<p>“How charming!” I exclaimed, bending forward to examine a tiny little
jumper that she was knitting.</p>

<p>“Oh, that’s for my godchild.”</p>

<p>“Who?”</p>

<p>“Oh, the little girl I christened. Madame Olenin’s little daughter.
She’s just three weeks old to-day. A dear little thing.”</p>

<p>“Another niece for Uncle Kostia, what! They do turn them out in that
family. Zina has more cousins than any girl alive!”</p>

<p>“Well,” said Fanny Ivanovna, “the little thing can’t help being her
cousin. And Madame Olenin is really very nice. What does it matter after
all if she’s her aunt? I respect her all the same, and she did so want
me to be the godmother, and the little girl is called Fanny after me.”</p>

<p>The canary hopping to and fro punctuated the swift movement of her
accustomed fingers.</p>

<p>“My dear Andrei Andreiech,” she burst out in answer to my question as to
when Nikolai Vasilievich would be back, “there was a time when I knew
all about his movements. But that time is over. I feel more and more as
we live longer that my hold on him is weakening. And I feel with every
day it’s getting weaker and weaker, and he is slipping away from me, and
I am powerless to stop him. And soon I shall cease to bother altogether.
He can stay there all night if he pleases.”</p>

<p>“I’ve seen Zina lately. She looks quite grown up.”</p>

<p>“Oh, what a headache I have!” She dipped her folded handkerchief into a
bowl of eau-de-Cologne and pressed it to her forehead. “If I hadn’t Nina
to console me—Oh, you have no idea what a tender, loving heart our Nina
has.”</p>

<p>“Nina <i>tender</i>?”</p>


<p>“You don’t know her. Do you remember that day you arrived here, and I
was so anxious to know where she had been? Well, she wouldn’t tell me
then because ... she thought it might upset her plan. Afterwards she
told me. She had been to see her mother.”</p>

<p>“Is that all?”</p>

<p>“Well, it seems her mother wants to make it up with me—wants, in fact,
that we should start a business together. Hats.”</p>

<p>“And won’t you?”</p>

<p>She thought for a time. “I don’t think I could,” she said at last,
“after what she’s <i>said</i> about me.”</p>

<p>There was a pause of silence, which the canary, though, did nothing to
observe. “But if I do, it will be solely for Nina’s sake. Poor child,
she so wants to make our peace.”</p>

<p>“But doesn’t Sonia, as the eldest sister, ever take the lead?”</p>

<p>“Sonia?” She laughed. “Why, look at Sonia. We have a nickname for
her—‘Miss Moon.’ It suits her admirably. And Sonia is deceitful.
Yesterday she lied to me. She said that they had been to see their
mother, but as a matter of fact Nina told me afterwards that they had
gone to a dance on the American cruiser with Mr. Ward and White and
Holdcroft.”</p>

<p>“What, again!”</p>

<p>“Yes, I am very much against it,” she confided.</p>

<p>“I was furious. I said to Nina: ‘Andrei Andreiech and your father had
nearly lost their lives looking for you everywhere during the firing.’
But all she said was, ‘There was no need to.’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>“They had been on the American Flagship ... on the American
Flagship....” My mind could not digest the news. Yesterday when the
firing had begun, Nikolai Vasilievich rushed in, panic-stricken, and
said that the three sisters had been lost in the upheaval. I had been
sitting in the little office with Sir Hugo, who was writing to a Czech
Colonel of his acquaintance to apologize for mis-spelling the Colonel’s
name in a recent letter. This done, Sir Hugo looked through some old
minutes of past meetings to see if there was any matter which had not
been quite thoroughly thrashed out. He thought he was about to find such
a matter, when a rifle report echoed sharply through the air, and was
immediately followed by a multitude of others. We rose and looked out of
the window. The projected <i>coup</i> had broken out.</p>

<p>There was a continuous rattle of machine-gun fire. The station building
and the square before it were being attacked by Gaida’s men and defended
by British-trained cadets from Russian Island School. A fearless cadet
in British khaki lay on the bridge that traversed the rails, fully
exposed to view, and rattled off his machine-gun; then he lay still.
Several bodies were already lying on the square, some dead, others
wriggling with pain.</p>

<p>Most of the remaining family had been removed to an empty barracks near
the station before fighting had become desperate. But it was not till
we had launched into the streets that we asked ourselves how we proposed
to set about our task. On we walked, looking in at stray houses,
inquiring at private flats; but I think at heart we realized that our
action was more by way of satisfying our consciences, for we had not a
ghost of an idea where to look for them. Returning, we perceived the two
mothers lamenting bitterly the death of the same children (which they
had been quick to take for granted)—but still not on speaking terms
with each other. A window had been knocked out by a stray shell.</p>

<p>Firing subsided and then resumed and grew in intensity, as darkness
descended upon the town. A drizzling November snow now fell upon the
wrangling troops. The station changed hands more than once. Some wounded
men had been picked up and dragged into a hospital rigged up in the
barracks, and were heard moaning and groaning the long night through,
while the city shook under fire of field-guns.</p>

<p>The morning unveiled a gruesome picture. The snow that had fallen in the
night, and was still falling, now covered the ground and its dead bodies
some inches deep. The square, the streets, the yards, the rails, and
sundry ditches betrayed them lying in horrid postures, dead or dying.
Those that were not dead, when discovered were finished with the bayonet
by the “loyal” troops, amid unspeakable yells. Then they lay still and
stiff in horrible attitudes. Men and women would stoop over them, gaze
and wonder. Perhaps there is nothing that brings home so clearly the
conviction of the temporary nature of human things as the sight of a
dead body. What a moment since had been a human being with a life and
purpose of his own was now an object, like a stone or a stick....</p>

<p>“I shall not forget that night,” said Fanny Ivanovna, “nor what I saw
this morning. The faces of the prisoners, some almost green from fright,
as they stood with their hands up in the cold grey light of the morning,
and the babyish face of that Cossack subaltern—a veritable mother’s
darling—as he detailed them into two parties. And then that other boy
of about the subaltern’s own age, awfully good looking, who had been
hiding in the chimney all night and was forgotten and only remembered as
the prisoners had been marched off to the station to be killed. Then
came that terrible rattle of machine-guns from within. He was hurried up
to the boyish subaltern who motioned in an off-hand manner in the
direction of the station; and then a soldier ran across with him—the
soldier in front, the boy following—hastening to be in time for the
firing-party. But the firing had just that moment come to an end. The
boy fumbled in his pocket and gave some folded paper to the soldier;
then vanished into the station. And some moments afterwards there came
those three solitary shots.”</p>

<p>“When I entered the station,” I said, “I saw piles of dead bodies lying
on the steps on which rich red blood trickled down all the way; and on
top of all that handsome boy, with the back of his scalp blown off. They
were shot at by machine-guns as they were being driven down the stone
staircase in the station, and their boots had been removed and
appropriated by their executioners. One man three hours afterwards was
still breathing heavily. He lay on the steps, bleeding, and covered by
other bleeding bodies. Another man in the pile was but slightly hit. He
lay alone in the pile of dead, with a curious mob and sight-seeing
soldiery walking about him, shamming death. After three hours he rose
and walked away, but was caught and shot.”</p>

<p>“Horrible!” she said. “It’s shameful! The Whites kill the Reds, the Reds
kill the Whites ... and nobody is any the farther. If people would only
realize that killing is the first thing they shouldn’t do.”</p>

<p>“The proposition would appear self-evident. But it seems as if the one
idea of the Kolchakites is bloodshed to suppress bloodshed; and that
this also happens to be the idea of the Bolsheviks; and that the
Kolchakites are shocked at it.”</p>

<p>“Why can’t human beings settle things by conference?”</p>

<p>“They must be human beings for that, Fanny Ivanovna.”</p>

<p>“Sir Hugo surely——”</p>

<p>“Sir Hugo’s chief preoccupation at a conference is to commit another
allied gentleman into saying ‘Yes’ on any given point, and then by a
series of masterful, elaborate and elusive thrusts of speech to commit
him into saying ‘No’; and then to point out the contradiction. It is
what Sir Hugo calls ‘displaying the good old fighting spirit.’ His
attention is essentially devoted to the careful recording of documents
that find their way into our office accidentally, documents which in
themselves he regards as inessential and unimportant. And the Admiral
hates Sir Hugo’s love of detail and exactitude which seems bent on
proving to him very clearly and precisely the uncertainty and vagueness
of his own position.”</p>

<p>She sighed.</p>

<p>“It is a consolation,” said she, “to think that there are other useless
people in the world besides ourselves....”</p>

<p>The snow still fell in heaps as I walked home, and it grew markedly
colder, and one felt the onset of winter; while prisoners, it was said,
were being killed in prison—noiselessly—out of consideration for the
Allies in the city.</p>

<h3>VIII</h3>

<p>Who can convey at all adequately that sense of utter hopelessness that
clings to a Siberian winter night? Wherever else is there to be found
that brooding, thrilling sense of frozen space, of snow and ice lost in
inky darkness, that gruesome sense of never-ending night, and black
despair and loneliness untold, immeasurable? Add to this the knowledge
of a civil war fumbling in the snow, of people ill-fed, ill-clothed and
apathetic, lying on the frozen ground, cold and wretched and diseased. A
snowstorm is blowing furiously; the wooden house groans and yells in the
night; the tin roof squeals in agony, fearful lest it be cast to the
winds; and the storm now howls like a beast, now sobs like a child, now
dies away, gathering for another outburst....</p>

<p>The house was lit and warm and comfortable. It was the Admiral’s house.
But the Admiral was away, and in his absence I had conceived it possible
to give a dinner-party. The arrangement of the guests at table had been
a delicate but delicious business. I had placed Fanny Ivanovna at the
side of Magda Nikolaevna. I had seated Nikolai Vasilievich side by side
with Eisenstein. I had sprinkled some of Zina’s sisters amongst the
three sisters. And there was Sir Hugo, who talked in French about the
Russian situation to Zina’s mother (who feared God, and knew no French);
and it was evident, moreover, as he talked that his daily paper was not
the <i>Daily Herald</i> but rather the <i>Morning Post</i>.</p>

<p>The table was littered with bottles of the very best wine, procured from
the Admiral’s private cellar, and the expression of my guests became, as
they do become under the influence of wine, more impulsive and less
amenable to the control of the will. Their will seemed, as the feast
proceeded, to become less and less amenable to the authority of the
conscience. Kniaz had been drinking cocktails wholesale. He had never
tasted one before, and found that his life had been wasted. “They are
exquisite,” he said.</p>

<p>“They are,” Sir Hugo said. “They induce one to forget their price....
Oh, no, no! I didn’t mean it in that way, Prince. Do have another
cocktail.”</p>

<p>I sat still among my guests, strangely flushed, and the vast sea of
Russian life seemed to be closing over me. I saw Fanny Ivanovna talking
to Magda Nikolaevna, somewhat timidly perhaps and with undue reserve,
but still <i>talking</i>! Eisenstein was gleaming with silent satisfaction as
he surveyed “the family.” He felt, I think, that he was one of it at
last, and now he was all right. Nikolai Vasilievich on more than one
occasion addressed Eisenstein as “Moesei Moeseiech” in an amiable if not
familiar <i>sotto voce</i>. Zina’s mother spoke very eagerly to Sir Hugo
about the persecution of the Russian priesthood by the Bolsheviks, but
much of her eloquence was lost upon him. Sir Hugo’s knowledge of her
language, in spite of his long residence in Russia, was inexplicably
remote. When he was asked if he could talk Russian well, he would say
“Moderately.” But, as a matter of fact, his ability to express himself
in Russian was, I think, confined to hailing a cab in that language by
crying out the word “Izvozchik,” and then, seated therein, muttering the
word “Poshol!” which he usually mispronounced as “Push off”—both words
happily meaning literally the same thing and so adequately similar in
sound as to serve his purpose.</p>


<p>General Bologoevski, on my left, was holding forth on the situation.</p>

<p>“Looks pretty hopeless,” I remarked.</p>

<p>“Not a bit of it,” rejoined the General.</p>

<p>“But they are retreating everywhere.”</p>

<p>“On purpose,” said the General.</p>

<p>“But whatever for?”</p>

<p>“Well, there was a conference of generals ... I presume ... who have
decided it. I think it a good thing myself.”</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>“Well ... we’ll entrap them.”</p>

<p>“I am most pessimistic.”</p>

<p>“I am perfectly optimistic—quite certain of victory.”</p>

<p>“Why, General?”</p>

<p>“Denikin.”</p>

<p>“He is advancing very slowly.”</p>

<p>“Ah, but he is about to enter Great Russian territory.”</p>

<p>“Well, what’s there in that?”</p>

<p>“Why,” he explained, “the Great Russians are the only real decent
Russians. I am a Great Russian myself.”</p>

<p>I nodded with significance, as if to indicate that this made all the
difference in the situation.</p>

<p>Then, once again, Fanny Ivanovna sat silent. Perhaps she thought of her
position, insecure and unconventional, disused, no longer wanted; and of
her instincts so discordant with her life, her instincts that had always
been on the side of respectability, the purity of home life, the
sanctity of marriage, and the very things, in fact, that had always been
denied her: so much so that in her unstable, questionable position she
had yet been stringently insistent on this aspect of their life, and
always in her heart was reminded that she had no title to enforce that
law, no claim, beyond a doleful craving for the decencies of usage and
convention. Perhaps the presence of Nikolai Vasilievich’s two other
wives had served to remind her of the painful irony of her life; perhaps
the wine affected her with melancholy as it had affected me. Perhaps she
pondered on her broken life, her sacrifices that had gone unnoticed; or
pictured to herself her eventual return to Germany, the cruel
astonishment of those for whom she too had sacrificed her life. And it
may have occurred to her, as a belated after-thought in life, that
possibly she had been “sat upon” too often and too much.</p>

<p>But no; it was not quite that. There was something fatalistic, and yet
almost defiant, in her look. A blend of optimistic resignation. What was
it? What was she discovering? Why that smile? It was as though in
desperation she had given him full rein and found, to her amazement,
that he did not seem to pull as hard as when she held him tight.</p>

<p>I perceived that my dinner-party promised well. I caught Fanny
Ivanovna’s eye and raised my glass; and instantly I had her glass
refilled. My head began to swim. I discovered an agreeable warmth in my
body, and the expression that had come on my face seemed to be getting
out of my control. “Fanny Ivanovna,” I cried, “never mind my expression:
I know it is stupid. It has come on of its own accord, and I cannot
quite remove it, though I feel that a smile may develop of itself at any
moment.”</p>

<p>“Look,” Nina said to Sonia, “how awfully funnily his face changes from
smile to seriousness. Look!”</p>

<p>I smiled a drunken smile.</p>

<p>“Look: there again!”</p>

<p>I should have explained here that I had a passion for that white and
pasty substance that Russians eat at Easter—paskha, and when I was in
Russia I made it my habit to eat it in and out of season. I had a
pyramid of considerable dimensions locked up in the safe.... And now, at
the close of dinner, the secret was betrayed. A dash was made for it.
The guests armed themselves with knives, forks, and spoons and dug into
the substance and cleared it away in less than twenty minutes. They then
lay moaning and suffering not a little from its effect on their
abounding stomachs.</p>

<p>We were jolly, exuberant, self-centred and sentimental. I felt
distinctly pleased with myself. I knew not why; that is the secret of
good wine. Some people laughed, others after the manner of the Slav were
fain to weep; and outside there raged the snowstorm of a Siberian winter
night.</p>

<p>Fanny Ivanovna, Magda Nikolaevna, Čečedek, Eisenstein, Nikolai
Vasilievich, reclined on sofas and arm-chairs, smoked and sipped
liqueurs; and Sonia, Nina, Vera, Zina and her sisters and Baron
Wunderhausen made a noise in the adjoining rooms and did wild things
with the furniture.</p>

<p>Uncle Kostia stood on the hearth-rug, dazed and very red in the face,
and held forth at great length: his Russian soul a reservoir of
overflowing feeling. “I feel positively strange,” he said. “I swear I
never felt like this before. I nodded, do you know, to some point in an
argument with which at the time I happened to agree, and to my great
embarrassment I somehow kept on nodding quite in spite of myself, and
keep on nodding—do you see me, Fanny Ivanovna?—though the portion of
the argument with which I had expressed agreement long died in oblivion.
I know it is the wine. It is good wine, and—to make a long story
short—I am drunk. But I don’t care. This is an exceptional night. It is
a memorable night. Fanny Ivanovna and Nikolai Vasilievich and Magda
Nikolaevna, Moesei Moeseiech, Zina, Sonia, Nina, Vera, Kniaz: I swear I
never felt so near to you as I do feel to-night. I feel beastly
sentimental. I feel that I could howl aloud. I feel that presently I
will go round and kiss each one of you in turn. Look into your own
hearts. What is the use of pretending? We are all one family and Nikolai
Vasilievich, our dearly beloved, much-respected Nikolai Vasilievich, is
our parent and guardian. He stood by us well in our hour of need. His
task has been an uphill task; but has he complained of us? Not once. He
has borne the burden of many families without a sigh of protest.
Speaking for myself, we men of letters have to lean for our support on
stalwart men like Nikolai Vasilievich, and it is indeed largely on their
generous help that art and literature must depend. As you know, we men
of letters are no business men, but if as a writer and a student of life
and human nature I may presume to give advice: don’t lose courage,
Nikolai Vasilievich. Remember, we are all behind you; we shall follow
you, if need be, to the end of the earth. Courage, Nikolai Vasilievich!
Keep hard at it! Keep hard at it!”</p>

<p>We became agitated. We all spoke at once, perhaps for no other reason
than that we had been deprived of speaking for so long. And then,
suddenly, we subsided, for on the floor above us, occupied by a Russian
family, some one was playing the piano. It was Chopin. We listened to
the music and grew still, and our souls were all music as though he had
touched their strings. And the house seemed charmed, and the gruff
Siberian night looked in through the window and listened in silence....
For his is the grace and sweet melancholy of romance, and his the
laughter of silver trumpets, and tears as bright as the dew at dawn. His
sorrows are no graver than the sorrow of the gold-red sunset, and his
sobs are the sobs of the sea, the echo of the waves weeping on the
rocks. And it has all been to him a dream in music, and when we hear it
we dream with him....</p>

<p>“And Fanny Ivanovna,” said Nikolai Vasilievich, “is now a widow!”</p>


<p>A thought flashed across my brain. “Fanny Ivanovna,” I cried, “I had
meant to ask you what was that funeral procession you all followed
yesterday?”</p>

<p>“My husband’s,” she said, and I was struck unpleasantly by her tone of
mirth and triumph.</p>

<p>“Eberheim?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” smiled Nikolai Vasilievich; “she is a widow now. A <i>merry
widow</i>!” And Fanny Ivanovna laughed in a loud and jarring manner. It
seemed odd why I had not guessed so obvious a candidate when I had seen
the funeral procession pass by my window, and had supposed that the
corpse had been some victim of the Gaida outbreak. We all felt that it
was the best thing for the man, and nothing more was said on the
subject. Eisenstein, in an impossible condition, sang sentimental gipsy
songs to his own accompaniment on the piano, and his voice was such that
the cat hid itself in the house and could not be found for three days
afterwards; and Nikolai Vasilievich was assisting him in a rather timid
staccato baritone. Sonia, Nina, Vera, Zina and her sisters, Baron
Wunderhausen and I were jazzing in the adjoining room. Fanny Ivanovna
and Magda Nikolaevna, seated side by side on the sofa, were discussing,
somewhat timidly it seemed, Magda Nikolaevna’s proposal that they should
start a millinery establishment together, procuring fashionable
“Parisian” hats from Peking and Shanghai and selling them at great
profit in Vladivostok; and Zina’s father was sleeping, mouth wide open,
in his chair.</p>


<h3>IX</h3>

<p>She was going along quickly, wrapped in the familiar fur; and it was
snowing merrily.</p>

<p>“Nina!”</p>

<p>She turned round and stopped, smiling. And the bright white winter day
seemed to be smiling with her. It was the day of the Social
Revolutionary <i>coup d’état</i>. Early in the morning troops of
revolutionary partisans had occupied the city peacefully and taken
possession of the public buildings, to wild cheering from the local
crowds. The Russian national flag had been hauled down and a red one
hoisted in its stead. Processions had appeared with revolutionary
banners, and the town was decorated in red. “Have you heard the news?”
she said. “Pàvel Pàvlovich, the Baron, has fled to Japan overnight,
without telling us a word.”</p>

<p>“Of course, he was in danger of being arrested by the Reds,” I said.
“But I suppose he’ll come back some day.”</p>

<p>She shook her head. “I don’t think so.”</p>

<p>“What does Sonia think?”</p>

<p>“She’s glad.”</p>

<p>“<i>Glad?</i>”</p>

<p>“Yes. She was going to leave him herself ... to marry Holdcroft. But
now....”</p>

<p>“Now what?”</p>

<p>“But now <i>he’s</i> left her.”</p>

<p>“Well, all the better, then. Saves trouble.”</p>


<p>“It’s ... humiliating.”</p>

<p>We went on together and, nearing home, we cut through masses of new
snow. It was one o’clock. The sun shone yellow. She put her hand into my
coat pocket. Tender flecks, falling from the sky, would linger on her
brows and lashes. We fumbled and wrangled in the snow; and, with that
bird-like look of hers, she said, “To-day ... I like you.”</p>

<p>At the American Headquarters dance last night she had been strangely,
inexplicably hostile; and Fanny Ivanovna had made it worse by exhorting
her to dance with me against her will. And, of course, there were Ward
and White and Holdcroft. I remember sitting there that night with a
sense of injury. What was the matter? Had I usurped too many of her
dances? I felt as a man might feel who in a moment of particular
goodwill towards mankind discovers that his watch has been pickpocketed.
I said nothing, but strove to put it all into my look. She came up to
me, rapturous, delicious. There was about her that night a disquieting,
elusive charm. “I told you that I love you. What else do you want?” She
said it with just that torturing proportion of smile and earnestness
that you could not tell how it was meant: and very likely that was just
how it was meant. I remember I ransacked my soul for something stinging.
“You can’t love,” I said. “You’re not a woman; you’re a fish.” It is
unfair to analyse love-reasoning unless in a similar emotional
temperature. The dance over, our coats on, we sat and waited for the
car, Nina looking rather sulky.... And to-day what a change the sunshine
has wrought!</p>

<p>We reached their house. “Come in,” she said.</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>She went in, took off her coat, and while I lingered, came back and
stood on the steps.</p>

<p>“You’ll catch cold like that.”</p>

<p>She shook her head.</p>

<p>“I wish,” said I, “that women would propose to men.... I should love to
say, ‘Oh, why can’t we remain just friends?’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>She looked at me. “You would say it to <i>me</i>?”</p>

<p>“Jokingly, of course.”</p>

<p>“I shan’t propose then.”</p>

<p>“And if I said it seriously, would you propose then?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” she laughed.</p>

<p>“Aren’t we supposed to be engaged, though?”</p>

<p>“Are we?”</p>

<p>“I think so.”</p>

<p>“We’ll marry but divorce at once,” she said, “and live separately, and
meet only once a year.”</p>

<p>And then the door opened and Nikolai Vasilievich said somewhat angrily
to me: “Either come inside, or go. She’ll catch cold standing here with
nothing on.” And as he vanished he rather slammed the door.</p>

<p>“Go in, Nina, or he’ll be angry.”</p>

<p>“Take no notice of him. None of us take any notice of him. That’s why he
is angry.”</p>

<p>“Then I’ll go in,” I said. And we both went in, and heard Fanny Ivanovna
saying: “Believe me, Sonia, it’s all for the best. If you like, send
him a post-card with ‘Good riddance’ on it. That’s all you need say.”
And as I listened, it transpired further—for misfortunes never come
alone—that Baron Wunderhausen was not a baron, and not even
Wunderhausen.</p>

<p>Sonia was downcast. “What the devil does it matter, anyhow,” argued
Nikolai Vasilievich, “above all now that he is gone, whether he is a
baron or no baron, Wunderhausen or no Wunderhausen?” But Sonia would not
hear of it. That he should have left without telling her a word! That he
should have lied to her all these years! Also she had always scoffed at
him for his title, thought it ridiculous, almost a deliberate
affectation. But now that the truth had been revealed to her and she
knew that he had never had a title, she felt that she had been insulted
rudely, married under false pretences. Well, she would insist on a
divorce; she would take good care that she was the first in the field to
insist on it. Holdcroft was extraordinarily attractive. He seemed rather
keen on Vera, though. But how beautifully he danced.</p>

<p>And just that moment the gramophone, which Vera was fiddling with, broke
loose into an intoxicating one-step. Nina, standing by it, echoed at the
end of each refrain—“My-y-y <i>cell</i>-ar!” as the music galloped into
syncopation.</p>

<p>“Whose is the gramophone?”</p>

<p>It was Olya Olenin’s, the timid “football” little niece of Uncle
Kostia.</p>


<p>“There they are!” cried Sonia. Three U.S. naval uniforms appeared in the
window.</p>

<p>“If only we had more room here,” sighed Fanny Ivanovna. But how
scrupulously clean she kept the little that there was of it.</p>

<p>“<i>I</i>’m for ever <i>blow</i>-ing bub-<i>bles</i>,” hissed the gramophone....</p>

<p>“<i>Fu</i>—fu fu fu <i>fu</i>—fu fu——” whistled Nikolai Vasilievich. And,
forgetful of her prodigal baronial spouse, Sonia dodged the chairs and
sofa in the embrace of Holdcroft, while Kniaz sat in his corner seat, a
little in the way, and read his paper and sucked sweets.</p>

<p>“You want to go?” Fanny Ivanovna looked at Nikolai Vasilievich with a
solicitude that suggested a desire to anticipate his wishes. “All right.
We’ll have our tea now. Sonia! Nina! Vera! Tea.”</p>

<p>“There’s no hurry,” he calmed her.</p>

<p>During tea he was hilarious. He had been out in the streets and mixed
with the crowds. What hilarious, happy crowds! The change had come about
at last. Something would happen <i>now</i>. He said he thought it would be a
few days only till the thing was finally settled. He meant to go and see
some of the new ministers. A quite decent Government, it seemed; and
what good order, all things considering. The Social-Revolutionaries had
a double platform; they appealed to those who had no use for
international militarism on revolutionary grounds, and to those who had
no use for revolution on national grounds. And Nikolai Vasilievich
thought that such broad-minded, reasonable people could not fail to see
his point as regards the gold-mines. I sat listening to him and in my
influx of sudden happiness eating more than I really wanted to; for I
felt she was <i>à moi</i> once more.</p>

<p>He went out at last, and Fanny Ivanovna shut the door behind him. She
looked at me, smiled, and then heaved a little sigh. “I let him do as he
pleases,” she said. “Perhaps it’s better so. We’ll see....”</p>

<p>As it darkened we took Olya home, and trailing our feet in the deep
snow, carried the uncomfortably heavy gramophone, and marched in various
formations, halted, marched again, and then, towards the climax, carried
Nina in a burial procession. At the Olenins we danced again, I claiming
Nina and the three American boys having to put up with what was “second
best.” Madame Olenin, a suckling in a jumper at her breast, stood in the
doorway and watched. A ten-years-old military cadet had followed her
into the room and also stood in the doorway, in a civilian overcoat, and
gaped at us. “Our Peter,” said she, “is a loyal little monarchist and
refuses to take off his shoulder-straps in spite of the Red <i>coup
d’état</i>.” The maternal hand stroked the offspring’s hair in a tender
gesture. “But I made him put on this civilian overcoat on top. It isn’t
safe, you know.”</p>

<p>I came up and cuddled little Fanny in a rather inefficient fashion and
lavished unmitigated praise, as is the classic way when talking to a
mother of her babe. And then little Fanny, as is the classic way with
babies, for no apparent cause, began howling, howling without rhyme or
reason. I was made to play the piano, and I was pleasantly aware that
Nina advertised me and showed me off as though I was her own special
merchandise. The snow in the yard was pink from the sun as we jumped
about on the sofa. She took water in her mouth and blew it out into my
face, whereon I got her into a corner and slapped her hard, while the
others looked on in amusement. She was trying to bite my hands; and then
as we went out she <i>would</i> insist on fastening my overcoat.</p>

<p>The others trailed behind, and we could hear their laughter growing
fainter as we walked ahead. The snow creaked agreeably beneath our feet.
It was five o’clock and there were the first signs of twilight. We
passed the sombre silhouette of their little wooden house. Oh, how sad
were these things in the winter.... Darkness was swiftly setting in. We
crossed the wood. The tall pine-trees, covered with a thick coating of
snow, stood mute and dreaming in the twilight; only their peaks moved
ever so gently to and fro, murmuring some vague complaint.</p>

<p>Then, suddenly, we came out into the open and saw the sea. Clad in an
armour of ice, it was as smooth as a mirror. Here and there a monstrous
snow-covered lump rose from the surface. The sky was grey and fretful
and darkness fell upon us with every minute. The sun, as it set, slowly
cast a feeble red flame on the sea chained in ice, and the crescent
moon spread a yellow light over the surface, glimmering in varied
colours on the ice, the snow, the glaciers. The wind strengthened and
the frost pricked at my ears.</p>

<p>“Say something! Say something!”</p>

<p>“What shall I say?”</p>

<p>“Why, you’re worse than Kniaz!” I exclaimed.</p>

<p>She smiled.</p>

<p>“Say that the sea is a dazzling sight, that the moon is ... well,
anything you like, that the sun is red copper.”</p>

<p>She looked as though all this was nothing, but she alone was real. “Why
falsify the tone? It’s there: I can see it.”</p>

<p>“Is this not beautiful then? You’re an amazing creature! One doesn’t
know which side to get hold of you. I talk to you about ... about ...
<i>this</i>” (a florid gesture to the sea). “You tell me it is false.”</p>

<p>“<i>This</i>” (an imitative florid gesture) “is all right. But please don’t
talk about it to me.”</p>

<p>She was silent.</p>

<p>“I liked you this morning,” she said then. “But <i>now</i>——!”</p>

<p>“You see, the trouble is,” said I, “that you can’t talk of anything but
fox-trots.”</p>

<p>“Last night at the American dance,” she said, “I danced with Ward.”</p>

<p>“I know, I saw you,” I said in a tone of condemnation.</p>


<p>“He’s very nice; I like him; but I can’t talk of anything to him. He
asked me, ‘Do you like fox-trots?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ And when later on we
danced the waltz, he said, ‘Do you like waltzes?’ And I said, ‘Yes.’ And
he said. ‘I like them too.’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>“There you are!” I cried triumphantly. “You’ve got to stick to me and
sack all the rest!”</p>

<p>“You are nice,” she said, “and there are days when I like you—though
<i>you</i> never know when they are. But ... I can’t talk to you.”</p>

<p>And she added, “I am going home.”</p>

<p>The sun contracted and grew more red and feeble as the moon shone
brighter and cast an even yellow light upon the space around us. Fretful
fantastic shadows flitted across the ice. Objects about us grew black.
Darkness was now hard upon us.</p>

<p>We returned by moonlight that glimmered on the snow.</p>

<h3>X</h3>

<p>Six weeks elapsed, and the snow was melting in the valley. When the sun
appeared behind the trees the birches, steeped in water, had that
silvery appearance which is beautiful beyond measure. Spring was in the
air.</p>

<p>It was a dinner, a formal, drunken, tedious affair that I must needs
attend. I sat between General Bologoevski and a British flag-lieutenant,
who had fallen in love with Nina at first sight and now drank in
greedily everything I had to say about her. In this building, not so
long ago, other men had met their death. At each <i>coup d’état</i> this
house had been besieged. Fugitives had taken shelter in these rooms.
Even on this sofa a body had been stabbed to death. And now we revelled
noisily. The dark, dark night of early spring was a breathing, watching
presence. The bare white-plastered walls seemed to prick their ears.</p>

<p>What has happened? Nothing. The nights were drawing in. The three
sisters had gone to a dance. And so had Ward, White and Holdcroft. When
now I called on them, more often I would find the older folks alone. How
melancholy, but strangely fascinating, were these evenings: this
gathering of souls dissatisfied with life, yet always waiting patiently
for betterment: enduring this unsatisfactory present because they
believed that this present was not really <i>life</i> at all: that <i>life</i> was
somewhere in the future: that <i>this</i> was but a temporary and transitory
stage to be spent in patient waiting. And so they waited, year in, year
out, looking out for <i>life</i>: while life, unnoticed, had noiselessly
piled up the years that they had cast away promiscuously in waiting, and
stood behind them—while they still waited....</p>

<p>What Nikolai Vasilievich actually waited for was best known to himself.
His hopes had been built up on the assumption of a sudden recovery of
his gold-mines, a possibility he connected somehow with political
developments in the Far East. It would not be fair to examine critically
the grounds he had for this ambitious expectation, from any rational
standpoint. Nikolai Vasilievich had built up enchanted castles of a rare
magnitude and beauty upon this somewhat flimsy and elusive foundation;
and he could not have now examined this foundation with an open mind
without ruining his dreams. And Nikolai Vasilievich had further
committed himself to the continued sustaining of illusions by
identifying in his mind certain definite promises of a financial nature
that he had made to Zina and her people, his daughters, Fanny Ivanovna,
his wife and Kniaz, with his dreams, indeed in such a manner that his
dreams had become vital realities to them; and this important
consideration had served the further purpose of giving his dreams all
the more the appearance of realities. He had private doubts, of course;
but he brushed them aside in a manly manner: he could not afford to do
otherwise. He waited for political changes. He was not clear in his mind
as to what particular political changes would serve his purpose. He did
not know. He was wise enough to know that in conditions so complex and
multitudinous as those in Siberia there was no telling which particular
political combination would affect his gold-mines favourably. Moreover,
he did not want to know. He did not want to know because he felt that if
he knew, his happiness henceforth must needs depend on the single chance
of that particular political combination, alone likely to affect his
gold-mines favourably, coming into power; rather did he like to think
that his happiness depended on <i>any kind</i> of change on the political
horizon—a more than likely possibility.</p>

<p>At last he saw hopeful signs. The Social Revolutionary partisans had
occupied the city, and from day to day he waited for an indication of
their attitude towards his gold-mines. This indication came to hand at
last when they called for him and put him into prison for having taken
part in that lamentable punitive expedition of which, as a matter of
fact, he was the chief victim. His term of imprisonment, unpleasant as
it was, had yet served the good purpose of further cementing his
multitudinous family. His daughters, Zina, Čečedek, Kniaz, Fanny
Ivanovna, his wife, Eisenstein, Uncle Kostia, Zina’s father, and the
book-keeper Stanitski, all met in their frequent calls in the cell of
the bread-winner.</p>

<p>On dragged the dinner. General Bologoevski at my side was telling me
that he was at heart a democrat, that he sincerely wished to see a
government that was more democratic than the old “damrotten government”
under the Czar. Yes, his heart, he said, was democratic, and even when
he was in Tokio he could not suffer himself, yes, he could not suffer
himself (he put his hands upon his heart), big and strong as he was, to
be pulled by a dwarf slave. So he placed the coolie in his riksha and
pulled the man himself. And yesterday he went with his own Chink cook to
a Chinese theatre and sat out the whole performance in an incredible
atmosphere. Now was that not democracy? And if it wasn’t, well, he
questioned what democracy really was. He did his bit. What else did the
people want? They were never satisfied.</p>

<p>And then that unknown quantity, that strange old man Sir Hugo, fired off
a jewel. Sitting opposite, I could hear a Captain of the U.S. Navy
talking of the decline of discipline; to which Sir Hugo answered in his
heckling manner, “Well, Captain Larkin, I don’t think I can agree with
you, and I should be inclined, if you’ll allow me, to suggest to you
that your people are not as disciplined as our men, or, should I say,
they have not had the same experience of discipline.”</p>

<p>“Well, may be yes; may be no,” said the other. “It seems, though, Sir
H<i>ugo</i>, they have done about equally well in the war, anyhow.”</p>

<p>Whereon Sir Hugo was convulsed with merriment. “Splendid fellow, Captain
Larkin! Good. Very good. Splendid! Ha, ha, ha, ha! You’re a diplomat,
Captain Larkin, you know. Oh, yes, you are. Very clever, very diplomatic
indeed. Ha, ha, ha, ha! I notice you use just the right word. Ha, ha,
ha, ha! You say ‘it <i>seems</i>.’ You’re not <i>committing</i> yourself, now are
you, eh?”</p>

<p>Captain Larkin ate his fish in silence. What was the world indeed coming
to?</p>

<p>On dragged the dinner. The black panes of the big bare windows stared
unflinchingly. Yes, the three sisters had gone to a dance with the three
American boys; and I could picture to myself that other private little
dance when I had quarrelled with her deliberately, to bring matters to a
head, to know where I stood. But the quarrel had not “come off,” and her
attitude was as ever unintelligibly vague. Then I sat there and watched
her outline—what a girl!—and her side-long, bird-like look....</p>

<p>In came two Italian tenors, fingering their guitars. We leaned back in
our chairs, watched the cigar smoke descend on the wine, listened how
the southern mellow voices defied the breaking rigour of the night of
early spring.</p>

<p>“To-morrow,” said the Flag-Lieutenant, “at 7.30 comes the ice-breaker,
and off we barge into the open.”</p>

<p>“To-o-re-e-<i>ador</i>——! To-o-rrre-ado-o-o-o-<i>or</i>! Tam-tram-taram-tam——”</p>

<p>“Two vermouths!”</p>

<p>“That’s the stuff to give ’em!”</p>

<p>Hand upon heart, the singers emptied the glasses.</p>

<p>“Stenka Razin! Stenka Razin! The Russian robber song,” enjoined the
table.</p>

<p>“<i>Ah! je ne connais pas, messieurs.</i>”</p>

<p>And we sang the Russian robber song as best we could, and the Italianos
both joined in as soon as they had got the hang of it. Dinner over, we
sat about anyhow, and another soloist, a Hungarian prisoner of war,
half-wailed, half-sobbed a Russian song that ended with the desperate
refrain of “Never, never, <i>never</i>, never ... never....” The Russian
General’s eyes blinked in the cigar smoke. “What’s that play, you
remember—‘Those are not tears: it’s the juice of my soul. The juice of
my soul....’<span class="lftspc">”</span> Then the old Hawaian band—we had been well provided for
that evening—played “<i>Tell me</i>,” by request.</p>

<p>“They played this at that dance,” said the Flag-Lieutenant. “To-morrow
at 7.30 we’re off. I wonder if we shall ever come back.”</p>

<p>“Those are not tears: it’s the juice of my soul....”</p>

<p>As we passed into the ante-room, the company was getting rowdy. A French
Colonel, cigar in mouth, was throwing gramophone records on the floor,
as though they were quoits, adding, with a blissful side-long smile at
me, “<i>Les disques!</i>” Somebody had released the gramophone, and a rowdy
one-step was the result. Cocktails, wine, liqueurs, whisky ... 7.30, the
ice-breaker, the juice of my soul, never, never, <i>les disques</i>.... Like
dregs, they had been stirred from the bottom, swam up and began to flow
hither and thither with the rolling of the tide. Abrupt impressions
crowd my brain. Nina. Spring. A trip by motor to the Garden City. We
lose our way. A bearded student of the intellectual brand offers to see
us through, gets in next to the chauffeur and directs him, but presently
loses his way too. “This hill,” says he, as if to justify himself, “used
to be on the right bank of the river.” “Heaven knows what’s happened to
it,” say I. She laughs. Oh, how she laughs! We arrive at last—and, oh!
horror! We meet her father and Zina. We lunch at the new Casino
restaurant. The old proprietor shakes his clients by the hand
respectfully, but bullies the waiters. It is Sunday. The sunlit sea,
too, has a festive, leisurely appearance. We walk into a public park
with the notice “Cattle and Other Ranks not admitted.” Supper at the
Casino restaurant. When evening comes the bullied waiters, conscious of
the approach of the Red Army, demand a share in the profits in addition
to their wage. The old proprietor shouts louder than he would and looks
to the public for moral support. “None of your Bolshevism here, please!”
he shouts, putting on in emphasis what he lacks in weight; and they can
all feel that he is frightened of them. We talk to two Russian soldiers.
One of them has never heard of Admiral Kolchak. “You fool,” says the
other, “he’s that English General who gives you clothing.” We return in
the early evening. The sky is flushed; the <i>datchas</i> steeped in foliage.
The seaway sunlit route. Pink light everywhere. The approach of summer,
the feeling that we should act in unison with nature, and the crushing,
curbing sense that we dare not—oh! for so many reasons. The waiting,
the suspension of plans owing, among other things, to the civil war. The
prevailing Russian atmosphere—chronic uncertainty. The wild flowers in
the grass at the road-side. The American regimental dance that night.
She looks at me, sits near me. I help her on with her coat; then to step
into the car. And the nocturnal moonlit journey homeward.... Youth! Her
splendid, wonderful youth. How trivial, how great. How much, how
little. That’s how we live. A flash here; a scent there. It’s gone, and
it’s the devil to recapture....</p>

<p>The big black window-panes still stare at you indecently; that’s why
somebody throws a bottle through them. The gramophone shoots painful
memories through my feverish brain. Now she is dancing with them....
They are playing rugger with a crumpled piece of paper on the floor. Oh!
the pictures. Somebody has set a match to the imitation palm-tree. Good
job! And somebody else has poured a bottle of whisky into the piano.
Uproarious shouts. A fat, flabby Major stands on the table, shouting
“Charing Cross. All change here!” and then begins to sell the furniture
by auction and imitate a Bolshevik speaker all in the same breath. I am
dragged up on the table. Shouts of “Speech! Speech!” My mouth begins to
move but the voice seems to be coming out of an empty barrel; both I and
they seem some one else. The table begins to sway like a ship—a
pendulum—and I feel that I am being supported on my legs only by some
outward spirit. <i>Les disques.</i> The juice of my soul. Ha, ha, ha, ha! I
laugh feebly but awfully funnily, as I am being carried out under the
arms. My room. Never, <i>never</i>.... Oh!... The bed is a merry-go-round, a
spindle. I dash out on to the floor. The floor revolves the other way.
Damn! Somebody ties a wet handkerchief round my head, and says, “You’re
a brick.... Nina. <i>Les disques</i>.... Youth.... Your splendid, wonderful
youth....”</p>


<h3>XI</h3>

<p>That evening I called on them to say good-bye, for we were leaving on
the morrow. The occasion coincided with the release of Nikolai
Vasilievich from prison, following on the seizure of the fortress by the
Japanese. Already through the windows there gazed the evening of early
spring. The church bells on that Easter Sunday, the most festal day in
the year, rang dolefully through the Christian city seized by a heathen
yellow race, and spoke of better days.</p>

<p>There had been another night of firing. The headquarters of the Russian
Zemstvo had been fiercely bombarded in the night. Then when at last the
building was stormed by Japanese troops they found, to their amazement,
that there was no one there. General Bologoevski, who had been attached
of late to the Russian Staff, discovered on the morrow that he had lost
yet another government overnight. Down came the red flag and up went the
flag of the Rising Sun. Russian prisoners tied to their Korean
colleagues were being led through the streets on a rope, like cattle.
Then, these lives wasted, this damage done, “their honour satisfied,” as
said the Nippon officers, they turned to the scattered government and
invited them to return to their shattered offices and resume their
interrupted duties. And Nikolai Vasilievich, released from prison, was
inclined to think that the little Nippons were, on the whole, good
fellows.</p>


<p>Fanny Ivanovna and he, alone in the house, were about to have tea. The
canary in the cage seemed livelier at the approach of spring. The cat
was growing fatter. The samovar could not be made to work. Nikolai
Vasilievich, dressed up in a morning-coat, put on white leather gloves
and blackened them considerably as he grappled inefficiently with the
large insurgent samovar that blew up columns of black smoke in the
little hall; while Fanny Ivanovna, as usual, shouted advice to him from
the adjoining room that really only served to annoy him.</p>

<p>“Sit down, Andrei Andreiech,” she said, “he won’t be long. Well,
Nikolai,” she shouted, “can you manage it? Andrei Andreiech is <i>waiting</i>
for his tea.”</p>

<p>“Shut up!” came his angry voice amid angry, recalcitrant hissing.</p>

<p>“Nikolai! Please! What will Andrei Andreiech think of you?”</p>

<p>There was no <i>kulich</i>, no <i>paskha</i>. But Fanny Ivanovna had done up the
table as well as she could for the occasion; and there was something
pathetic about the poor results she had attained compared with the
lustre of pre-war Easter-week in Petersburg. We sat at table, and no one
spoke. Nikolai Vasilievich was sad. Was he sad because he had returned
from prison to something that was only prison in a mitigated form? Was
it that the suspense had been too long, that he had succumbed in the
waiting? Was it that he had suddenly, secretly, for no particular
reason, on the eve of great changes, lost faith in the recovery of his
mines? Or was it just reaction, the unexpectedness of his release? How
much the one, how much the other, who can tell? The emotion of the soul
is an elusive thing. There is a subtlety about the moods that bears no
introspection. These nights in early spring in Vladivostok are so
intolerably sad that oft-times one might weep for no other reason than
that life was passing untouched, unrealized, a drudgery with but a gleam
of beauty....</p>

<p>Only later in the evening it transpired from his conversation that he
hesitated. He hesitated what to do. His mind was in a state of
perplexity and doubt. His finances were coming to an end. Should they
all follow Baron Wunderhausen to Yokohama on the off-chance that he has
secured some post there? But he remembered that the Baron was not a
baron, and not even Wunderhausen, and he felt that he would be safer not
to count on him. They might follow the Admiral to England, as the
Russian General was doing; or remain with Eisenstein in Vladi, who was
beginning to succeed as a dentist here—there was a dearth of them—and
wait till the mines materialize? Perhaps he had better wait. Things
seemed to be moving now at last, and perhaps there was more hope now
than there had been hitherto.</p>

<p>After supper the Admiral and Sir Hugo came to say good-bye. Also,
gradually, the family collected. The room was now full of people. The
talk, as ever, lapsed into politics. The Russians have a habit of
suspecting the “Allies” of unheard-of calumnies, so much so in fact that
even the surprising attitude of innocence adopted by the allied
representatives, who sincerely know no better, seems a fairer statement
of the true position. The incentive to bloodshed in this miserable
Russian business, as in fact the incentive to all murder, is not so much
a matter of wanton wickedness as wanton ignorance: a metaphysical
confusion of motive: a chaos of the mind: a matter of muddled ethics. It
is an integral part of Russian hospitality that they blackguard an
“ally” to his face for the “calumnious machinations” practised by his
Government in foreign affairs. The amusing thing about it is that this
blackguarding is so deplorably inconsistent. One is apt to be shouted
down for the “betrayal” of Kolchak, the “annexation” of the Caucasus,
and the starvation by blockade by one’s host, who will have it that all
these diabolical acts have been deliberately designed by Mr. Lloyd
George in order to “humiliate” Russia for her early exit from the war.
But really all this angry denunciation is almost meant as a compliment:
to show how much they like you personally despite your racial
blackguardism, which they take for granted. Thus accosted, one is apt to
become heated, stick up for the Government of one’s country, and
overstate facts. The room becomes a bear-garden.</p>

<p>Eisenstein opened the attack. “Your allied diplomats,” he said, “are
hopeless. Some months ago I had occasion to see one of these worthy
representatives of the diplomatic corps on behalf of a number of Jews
that were in danger of being massacred by Kolchak’s officers. The
diplomat, my client, by the way, was a marvellous linguist, a wonderful
specimen of humanity. There he sat before me, maintaining a most
distressing silence in twenty-eight foreign languages. ‘I beg of you to
intercede,’ I said, ‘to prevent their being massacred. I entreat you,
sir, to protest.’</p>

<p>“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>My dear Mr. Eisenstein,’ he said at last, ‘how can I protest—before
they are killed? I want facts to go upon. I cannot act before I have
facts. Facts, Mr. Eisenstein, facts!’</p>

<p>“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Sir,’ I cried, ‘you will have <i>deadly</i> facts, if you are satisfied to
wait at all.’</p>

<p>“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Anyhow,’ he said, ‘I am not going to risk my reputation for flimsy
rumours of this kind. I have been a diplomat now for thirty-six years,
and never once in my career, sir, have I said anything that ... well,
could be misconstrued ... to mean something. And I am certainly not
going to revise my methods now.’ And that was all I got out of him.”</p>

<p>“You Allies,” said Uncle Kostia, “have no sense of humour. I’m a
sedentary worker, a man of letters, no fighting man in any sense. I sit
in my room all day and watch your intervention through the window, so to
speak. And it amuses me to see how you are fussing over us and always in
the wrong direction, running about like clowns in a circus. A naval
gentleman of yours will arrive at the port, fresh and raw from the high
seas, and will be moved to request enlightenment from his more
experienced colleagues on this rather elementary question: ‘Who is
Kolchak? Is he a Bolshevik?’ He will be corrected in his erroneous
supposition; and then, a week later, he will begin to dabble in Russian
politics and will undertake brief excursions along the coast and fire
now and then, somewhat promiscuously, at groups of villagers, whom in
his simplicity he believes to be Bolsheviks—boom—boom—boom—boom! He
will set them flying in all directions, perhaps kill a cow or so. After
such a trip he will return to port, cheery and in good spirits; and
after some little while the scattered villagers will return to their
village, consume the cow, and resume their interrupted occupations....
Wonderful minds you have! You will prop up some half-witted general and
send in stores of clothing and munitions. And the fruit of it? The
Bolshevik divisions wearing British uniforms with royal buttons, and the
Bolshevik minority in Moscow nationally strengthened in the face of
foreign enemies. I sit at my window, writing, reading, and the news
dribbles through: ‘Omsk fallen. Kolchak shot. Allies packing up.’ It
seems ... silly.”</p>

<p>“Quite,” said the book-keeper Stanitski. It was a curious thing that the
book-keeper Stanitski should not have been seen in Nikolai Vasilievich’s
household till the absence of finances in the firm of Nikolai
Vasilievich provided him with nothing to record. Nikolai Vasilievich
still went to his office every afternoon to talk things over with
Stanitski and possibly to keep up the feeling that he was still a
business man; and sometimes Zina would come and see him at his office.
Stanitski was glad of these visits; for he would then drop the paper he
had been reading—there was absolutely nothing to do—and take part in
their conversation. As business gradually dribbled down to nothing, one
felt that the book-keeper Stanitski was becoming less of an employee and
more of a friend and hanger-on. He was absolutely indispensable to
Nikolai Vasilievich, for Stanitski was an optimist.</p>

<p>“Kolchak was impulsive and well-meaning,” said Eisenstein, “but
unfortunate in his selection of a task. He dismissed General Ditrich,
who wanted to give up Omsk to save the Army, and replaced him by General
Saharov, who undertook to keep Omsk; whereon General Saharov lost both
Omsk and the Army.”</p>

<p>“You Jews,” said the Admiral, “are all damned Bolsheviks.” When the
Admiral spoke of Jews he was filled with anger and, curiously, his face
assumed a kind of Semitic expression.</p>

<p>“I wasn’t, Admiral,” he said. “I might be one now. There may be a gleam
of hope there at least. There’s none here.”</p>

<p>“<i>I</i> wasn’t one,” said Kniaz, his eyes and nostrils flaming with
passion, “till you Allies made me one!” The room grew still. We all
turned round and stared at him. He had come in an hour or so ago, said
nothing and consumed a box of chocolates all by himself. For twenty
years or more he had said nothing. We felt that he had had ample time to
think deep thoughts: and there at last he was pouring them out: giving
us the benefit of all these years of silent contemplation: releasing the
compressed fervour of his humiliated and down-trodden patriotism.</p>

<p>“Kniaz! Kniaz!” cried Fanny Ivanovna in alarm. “Kniaz!”</p>

<p>But there was no stopping him. He spoke with the tremor and vehemence of
a man who had held his tongue for twenty years. He overwhelmed us with
surprise, but he seemed no less overwhelmed himself, flushed and
marvelling at what was the matter with him. “Why I personally object to
your meddling in our affairs,” he cried, “is because it implies the
impression as if you could manage your own.” Fearful, flaming words spat
from his fiery mouth. “Ireland. India. Egypt.” Etc., etc, etc.</p>

<p>An Admiral contradicted by an adult person not subject to Naval
regulations is a man at a disadvantage.</p>

<p>“They are just a pack of damned Bolsheviks, the lot of them, that’s all
they are,” said he.</p>

<p>“Jew-led, I suppose,” laughed Eisenstein.</p>

<p>“The Russian question,” said the Admiral, “is a very big question, and I
do not propose to discuss it here.”</p>

<p>“You have made it into a big question,” they all shouted, “because you
had not the imagination to foresee how it would grow into a big question
when it was yet a little one.”</p>

<p>“I wonder,” said the Admiral, “if you have held these views
consistently throughout the revolution, if you had always been opposed
to our help?”</p>

<p>“Well,” said Kniaz, “when I thought you would back up a moderate
democratic party I was at least more hopeful of the issue.”</p>

<p>“<i>Which</i> ‘moderate party,’ pray?”</p>

<p>“Avksentiev’s Government. The Directorate.”</p>

<p>“Oh, those!” scoffed the Admiral. “They weren’t much good. They did not
believe in armies, and fighting, and that sort of thing.”</p>

<p>Kniaz looked up at him and pondered over the Admiral’s uniform and
probably thought that fighting, for the gallant sailor, was really an
end in itself. And Kniaz concluded with the words: “And now having
thoroughly muddled up our issues, you leave us to the tender mercies of
the Japanese.” But Sir Hugo, conceiving that they were arguing beside
the point, snatched that phrase from him and stepped in between them
with much dignity. He must have felt that the occasion called for a
clear brain like his own to clear the misunderstanding.</p>

<p>“I think, Prince Borisov” (and we all stared at Kniaz: it was indeed
characteristic that Sir Hugo should be the first to know the Prince’s
name), “that you are totally mistaken as to the object of the Allies in
Siberia. You use that most unfortunate word ‘invasion.’ There was no
question of ‘invasion.’ Our sole object in coming out to Russia, and the
Admiral will confirm it, was to establish one indivisible national
Russia by creating one strong united Russian Army—and that object, I
am glad to say, we have now achieved.”</p>

<p>“One national Russia! Excuse me, but—but—but—but if there is any
national Russia to-day it is all on the other side. As for the Russian
Army, the only Russian Army now is the Bolshevik Army. The others have
all melted away.”</p>

<p>“Ho! Kniaz is a Bolshevik!” cried Fanny Ivanovna.</p>

<p>“Ho! ho!” cried the others.</p>

<p>“I will not argue about details, Prince Borisov. I am not a biologist
and I don’t dissect. And I don’t propose to be dragged into pedantic
microscopic analysis as to which is the particular political party to
which the army, for the moment, swears allegiance. I am satisfied that
it is a strong <i>Russian</i> Army, which it has been our object to create.
And I will now say good-bye to you, and I will ask you to accept my very
best wishes for the welfare of your great country, sir, and your
personal welfare, too. Good-bye.”</p>

<p>The Admiral and Sir Hugo then vanished with Nikolai Vasilievich, and
Fanny Ivanovna went after them into the little hall to see them out,
while I remained behind.</p>

<p>“Sonia! Vera! Nina!” came from Fanny Ivanovna. “How dark! Light the
<i>elektrichno</i>!”</p>

<p>“Why don’t you tell her,” I said to the three sisters, “that it is not
‘<i>elektrichno</i>,’ but ‘<i>elektrichestvo</i>’?”</p>

<p>“We’ve told her hundreds of times,” they replied in unison, “but she
will have it her own way ‘<i>elektrichno</i>’ and ‘<i>elektrichno</i>.’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>The Admiral’s departure had set the ball spinning. Very soon the bulk of
them was gone. And then the incredible happened. The three American boys
arrived and took the three sisters to a dance. And on the eve of my
departure! I heard their laughing voices in the street, as the door
closed upon them. That settled it. How they enjoyed themselves! How they
enjoyed life! As for me, I would have to go home and pack.... That
settled it.</p>

<p>I sat alone with Nikolai Vasilievich and Fanny Ivanovna.</p>

<p>“Wasn’t Kniaz great?” said Nikolai Vasilievich.</p>

<p>“Who could have expected such eloquence from Kniaz?” said Fanny
Ivanovna.</p>

<p>“Last night,” said Nikolai Vasilievich, “Fanny Ivanovna and Kniaz sat
alone and drank. They were quite drunk when I got home.” And he laughed
in a sad, kindly manner.</p>

<p>“We only had a little port,” said Fanny Ivanovna. “Kniaz drank but said
nothing. He <i>is</i> a funny man. He bought some live chickens, and he keeps
telling me every day at supper that he will bring me fresh eggs as soon
as the chicks grow up and begin to lay. His contribution, you see, to
the supper he consumes here! The chickens have had time to grow into old
hens—but the eggs are not forthcoming. And when I say to him, ‘Kniaz,
what about these eggs?’ he answers in a tone as though I had wronged
him, ‘But, Fanny Ivanovna, they are only chickens yet.’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>

<p>“He is always borrowing money from me,” said Nikolai Vasilievich, “and
he owes me many hundred thousand roubles—we have lost count, what with
the exchange!—and two days ago he borrowed forty roubles just to pay
his cab. He plays cards all day, and yesterday he won twenty thousand
roubles; and when Fanny Ivanovna suggested that he should pay me back,
at any rate some of his debt, he gave me back the forty roubles!”
Nikolai Vasilievich smiled again in a sad and kindly manner. What
beautiful and kindly eyes he had....</p>

<p>And then we talked of Petersburg and the old days, of pre-war Easter,
and their charming house in the Mohovaya.</p>

<p>“And do you remember the <i>Three Sisters</i>, Nikolai Vasilievich?”</p>

<p>“Don’t I! I was so wild that night because I had to miss an appointment
I had made with Zina. Oh, I was so wild that night....” He looked at his
watch.</p>

<p>“Well!” he said, and rose, yawning. “I’ve got to go.”</p>

<p>He put on his coat, for the night was fresh and damp, and his goloshes,
as the roads were muddy. We heard the door close on him as he went out.</p>

<p>“Always going to Zina’s?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Fanny Ivanovna. “But it’s quite all right. They play cards
there every night.” And then added for further reassurance: “He is
passionately fond of cards ... and it keeps him occupied....”</p>

<p>“And do you remember that other play ... at the Saburov?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” she said. “Yes.... Oh, what was the ending of that play? We had
to leave before the end. I was curious how it would end. But I think you
stayed to the last?”</p>

<p>“Yes.... She is waiting for him to come back to her. She is waiting
confidently because he has left his silk hat on the table. So she is
waiting. But his valet comes and takes the hat; and she breaks down—and
curtain!”</p>

<p>“Oh,” she said.</p>

<p>“Nikolai Vasilievich liked it,” I observed.</p>

<p>“Did he like it?”</p>

<p>She did not like it. By her face I could see that she did not like his
liking it. It was as if the thing was peculiarly discordant with her own
mood and trend of thought, as if she feared, against her hope, that
Nikolai Vasilievich, in spite of all, might one day follow the example
of the gentleman with the silk hat ... and send Stanitski to her for his
suits and underclothes.</p>

<p>She brooded.</p>

<p>“How long ago it seems,” she said at last. “To think how long ago!...
and we are still the same. Nothing has changed ... nothing. Then it was
the climax, and we held our breath expecting that now ... now something
<i>must</i> happen. Nothing happened. Then our whole life stood on edge, and
the edge was sharp. We felt that the crisis could not last. We waited
for an explosion. But it never came. The crisis still dragged on: it
lapsed into a perpetual crisis; but the edges blunted. And nothing
happened. Life drags on: a series of compromises. And we drag along, and
try to patch it up ... but it won’t. And it won’t break. And nothing
happens. Nothing ever happens. Nothing happens....”</p>

<p>“When I was very young,” I said, “I thought that life must have a plot,
like a novel. But life is most unlike a novel; more ludicrous than a
novel. Perhaps it is a good thing that it is. I don’t want to be a
novel. I don’t want to be a story or a plot. I want to live my life as a
life, not as a story.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” she said, pursuing her own thought. “Nothing happens.
<i>Nothing</i>....”</p>

<p>The black night gazed through the window. The samovar produced
melancholy notes. Tea was getting cold on the table.</p>

<h3>XII</h3>

<p>“Would she come?” I thought, as next morning we drove off to the wharf.
We passed a lonely square with a solitary Chink with a tin sword. That
was the last we saw of Vladivostok.</p>

<p>The family came to see us off in practically its full strength. But she
did not come. That settled it.</p>

<p>Nikolai Vasilievich was unshaven—a perfectly correct omission in a
Russian gentleman. He wore blue spectacles, a bowler hat, a summer coat
and goloshes. On the pier we talked of the political situation. The
Admiral repeated but one phrase: “We are not to blame.” The Russian
General shook his head and blamed some vague, unknown power in rather
vague, indefinite terms with a rather vague, indefinite blame, and then
summed up the situation with “I told you so!” though the substance of
his telling was all very mysterious. But both fools and wise men alike
had long given up the attempt to discover any meaning whatsoever in this
resplendent General’s utterances; and if they listened to him at all,
their attention was usually concentrated on his face or uniform or any
other object near at hand.</p>

<p>She had not come. That settled it.</p>

<p>It rained, as on the day we arrived.</p>

<p>Then the Admiral came up to Nikolai Vasilievich to say good-bye. “Well,
Nikolai Vasilievich,” he said, “what will you do?”</p>

<p>“Well ... I’ll wait,” said Nikolai Vasilievich. “I don’t think it can be
long now....”</p>


